This  2005  inductee  into  the  Nevada  Writers  Hall  of  Fame  escaped  the  Paiute  War  by  traveling  to Virginia City and San Francisco to perform on stage as part of “A Paiute Royal Family.” This author wrote an 1883 work, subtitled Their Wrongs and Claims, in an effort to raise monetary support for their people and to challenge   ethnic   stereotypes.   The   author   of Life   Among   the   Piutes,  which  is  considered  the  “first autobiography written by a Native American woman," and representing Nevada in the National Statuary Hall, for ten points, who was this author and activist?	ANSWER: Sarah Winnemuca (or Sarah Hopkins; or Thocmentony; or Tocmetone)
This city is home to the medieval Merchant's Bridge, the longest-inhabited bridge in the world, and an 1808 meeting in this city, between Alexander the First and Napoleon Bonaparte, forced Sweden to join the Continental System. Henry the Sixth called a meeting in this city to resolve a dispute between Louis the Third  and  Archbishop  Conrad  of  Mainz  that  ended  in  disaster.  An  1184  building  collapse  in  Thuringia  led over sixty nobles of the Holy Roman Empire to drown in human excrement in a latrine disaster in, for ten points, what German state capital city?	ANSWER: Erfurt (accept Erfurt Latrine Disaster and similar answers; accept Congress of Erfurt)
This person, whose government proposed the "Kaldor Budget," wrote "The West on Trial," a work concerning  their  efforts  toward  national  independence.  This  co-founder  of  the  Political  Affairs  Committee called  for  a  strike  against  the  Booker  Sugar  Company and  was  arrested  after  the  Royal  Welsh  Fusiliers arrived.  This  person's  wife,  Janet  Rosenberg,  worked  with  Forbes  Burnham  and  this  leader  to  found  the People's   Progressive   Party.   The   first   ethnically   Indian   head   of   government   outside   of   the   Indian subcontinent, for ten points, who was this president of Guyana?	ANSWER: Cheddi Jagan (or Cheddi Berret Jagan)
Justin the Second's failed siege of this city precipitated his mental breakdown, and this city was called "The Shield of the Empire" by Ammianus Marcellinus, for its resistance of a Persian siege. This city was the capital  of  the  province  of Mesopotamia  under  Diocletian, and  Dara  was fortified  by  Anastasius in  order  to serve as a counter to this city in modern-day Turkey. For ten points, identify this Roman citadel, which was turned over to the Persians after the death of the Roman emperor known as Julius the Apostate.	ANSWER: Nisibis (or Nusaybin; or Nesbin)
This man was mentored by George Washington Gale, the founder of the Oneida Institute of Science and Technology, and this man banned slave owners from Communion at the Chatham Street Chapel in New York City. This husband of the New York Female Moral Reform Society founder, Lydia Root, succeeded Asa Mahan  as  president  of  Oberlin  College  and  taught  students  like Theodore  Weld.  For  ten  points,  name this Presbyterian Minister and "Father of Old Revivalism" who led the Second Great Awakening.	ANSWER: Charles Grandison Finney  2023-24 HS National History Bowl  Round 16 2
This site was the largest adobe city in the Western Hemisphere and is known for its ciudadelas [[syoo- dah-DEH-lahs]]. This site contains the high walled compound of Nik An, in which reliefs of fish represent the Humboldt Current and El Niño [[NEE-nyoh]]. Situated in the Moche [[MOH-cheh]] Valley, near the modern- day city of Trujillo [[troo-HEE-yoh]], this city was conquered by the Incas in 1470. For ten points, name this archeological  site,  which  served  as  the  seat  of  the  Chimú  Empire  in  western  Peru,  the  largest  city  in  pre- Columbian South America.	ANSWER: Chan Chan (accept Chimor before "Chimu" is mentioned)
This person gives their adopted name to the county seat of Caledonia County in Vermont, and one work by this person was inspired by their experiences in Chester, New York. This person popularized the Latin motto "Ubi panis ibi patria," in one context, and praised the "fair cities, substantial villages, extensive fields" of middle colonies in a work that notably described the American frontier to European audiences. For ten points, name this French-American author of a set of Letters from an American Farmer.	ANSWER: John Hector St. John (or Michel Guillaume Jean de Crèvecoeur; anti-prompt on "St. Johnsbury")
Difficulty traversing the Flossgraben canal presented a challenge for one side at this battle, where Dodo  von  Knyphausen  crossed  the  Via  Regia.  The  Heilbronn  Alliance  was  formed  in  the  aftermath  of  this battle, in which a cavalry charge was led by Pappenheim before he was mortally wounded. Axel Oxenstierna took  the  reins  of  a  war  effort  in  the  aftermath  of  this  1632  battle,  following  the  death  of  "the  Lion  of  the North". For ten points, name this battle of the Thirty Years' War in which Gustavus Adolphus was killed.	ANSWER: Battle of Lützen
This city, home to the Lala Mustafa Pasha Mosque, was nicknamed the "city of 365 churches" and was given one of its early names by Ptolemy the Second, referencing his sister, Arsinoe [[ar-SIN-noh-ee]]. A 1571 siege of this city ended with the flaying of Venetian officer Marco Antonio Bragadin, who defended this city from a much larger Ottoman force, potentially facilitating victory for the Holy League at Lepanto. For ten points, name this city, located east of Nicosia, a major port city in the medieval period of Cyprus.	ANSWER: Famagusta (or Gazimagusa; or New Justiniana; accept Siege of Famagusta; accept Ottoman Famagusta; accept Arsinoe before mentioned)
One  dissent  issued  in  this  case  stated  that  "Section  2  demands  no  such  thing,  and,  if  it  did,  the Constitution would not permit it." Edmund LaCour argued on behalf of one state for this case, while the oral arguments for the winning side were made by Deuel Ross, of the NAACP's Legal Defense Fund. Establishing that Alabama's Congressional map violated the Voting Rights Act, for ten points, what was this 2023 Supreme Court case, which required Alabama to create a second majority-minority district?	ANSWER: Allen v. Milligan (or Wes Allen, Alabama Secretary of State, et al. v. Evan Milligan, et al.; accept either underlined portion)  2023-24 HS National History Bowl  Round 16 3
This person's daughter, Constance, married Alan Fergant, the Duke of Brittany, while another of this person's daughters, Agatha, was betrothed to Alfonso the Sixth of Castille. Supposedly, this person's future husband dragged them off a horse by their braids and beat them after they told him a person like them could not marry a "bastard." This queen, the mother of Robert Curthose [[KURT-hose]], gave her husband the ship Mora for  an  invasion  of  England.  For  ten  points,  name  this  woman  "of  Flanders,"  the wife  of  William  the Conqueror.	ANSWER: Matilda of Flanders (accept Maud in place of "Matilda")
When distinguishing two principles, this speech claimed "whoever holds to the one must despise the other." This speech also claimed that the "sacred right of self-government" and the belief that "all men are created equal. . .are as opposite as God and Mammon." Delivered in 1854 in front of a courthouse, this speech outlined its orator's opposition to popular sovereignty and the Kansas-Nebraska Act. For ten points, name this Abraham Lincoln speech, usually named for the Illinois city in which it was given.	ANSWER: Peoria Speech
After  this  battle's  losing  side  fled  to  Trogir, the victors seized the losing kingdom’s royal seal and issued a number of fake decrees to harass one side’s leaders. A Ruthenian slave’s warning of a planned bridge crossing gave Ugrin ample time to prevent an ambush at  this  battle,  which  is  sometimes  named  for  the  Sajo  [[SAH-yoh]]  River  near  which  it  was fought. Berke and Subotai were commanders of one army at this battle, which saw Bela the Fourth’s army annihilated by the son of Jochi. For ten points, name this main battle between the Mongols and Hungarians during the former’s invasion of Europe.	ANSWER: Battle of Mohi (accept the Battle of the Tisza River; accept the Battle of the Sajó River before mentioned)
Hugh  Guthrie  falsely  claimed  that  participants in  this  event  were  the  first  to  fire  in one clash.    R.B.    Bennett    accused    this    event's    leader,    Slim    Evans,    of    committing embezzlement. Demands for skilled laborers to receive union wages were made during this event, which was undergone by members of the Workers’ Unity League. Participants in this event fought with the Mounties in the Regina [[reh-JYE-nah]] Riot. Participants in this event often traveled in boxcars to its central city. For ten points, name this journey undertaken by Canadian laborers to protest in the national capital.	ANSWER: On-to-Ottawa Trek (accept Regina Riot before mentioned)
This  scientist  was  the  first  to  prove  that  human  T-lymphotropic  virus  could  cause cancer.  This  person  served  as  the  chief  scientific  officer  of  iTherX  Pharmaceuticals,  which produced  medication  for  Hepatitis  C.  In  1990,  this  woman  started  the  Center  for  AIDS Research  at  the  University  of  California,  Irvine. Passing  away  in  2020,  for ten  points, who was this Chinese-American virologist, the first researcher to clone HIV, helping prove HIV’s link to AIDS?	ANSWER: Flossie Wong-Staal  2023 National History Bowl VJV National Championships Finals
At the Battle of Kemp’s Landing, a member of this group captured Colonel Joseph Hutchings. A member of this group, who dubbed himself “Colonel Tye,” later became the leader of the “Black Brigade,” a guerilla force tasked with defending New York City. Another member  of  this  military  unit  who  had  previously  been  enslaved  by  George  Washington participated in a rebellion in Sierra Leone. Composed of escaped enslaved persons fighting on  behalf  of  the  British  Crown,  for  ten  points,  what  is  this  military  unit  that  originated  in Virginia and disbanded in 1776?	ANSWER: Lord Dunmore’s Ethiopian Regiment (accept Royal Ethiopian Regiment)
This  group  practiced  male  continence  as  a  form  of  birth  control  and  for  their eugenicist  Stirpiculture.  While  a  member  of  this  group,  Charles  Guiteau [[GEE-toh]] was referred to as “Charles Get Out” during public criticism. This group originated the term “complex marriage” and was later reorganized as a silverware company. This group was founded by John Humphrey Noyes, who preached that Jesus had returned to Earth already and  that  humanity  needed  to  attain  perfection  in  this  life.  For  ten  points,  name  this  New York commune known for practicing free love.	ANSWER: Oneida Community
Along the Isonzo River, this man launched four failed offensives intended to capture the  fortress  of  Gorizia,  resulting  in  over  250,000  casualties for  his army.  Following  World War One, this general was heavily criticized for Italy’s defeat in the Battle of Caporetto, despite this  field  marshal  claiming  to  bear  no  responsibility.  For  ten  points,  name  this Marshal of Italy whose failed attacks during World War One earned him a reputation as one of the conflict’s worst military generals.	ANSWER: Luigi Cadorna
Christopher  Marlowe  wrote  an  unfinished  poem  about  this  mythical  figure  and  his lover,  which would  later  be  completed  by  George  Chapman.  Following  his  successful emulation of a notable feat of this mythical figure, Lord Byron composed the poem  “Written After Swimming from Sestos to Abydos.” This figure convinced his lover, a priestess of Aphrodite, that a virgin was not suited for such a position. For ten points, name this figure, who drowned after his lover Hero plunged to her death in the sea.	ANSWER: Leander (accept Hero and Leander)
One of this event's leaders stated that "Nothing is lost, save honor." One of the men who  caused  this  event  was  Abel  Corbin,  who  married  a  sister  of  the  sitting  president. Robber barons sought knowledge about the sale of the central good during this event, four million dollars of which was released on September 24, 1869. Insights into Ulysses Grant's policies were sought in the lead-up to, for ten points, what event in which Jim Fisk and Jay Gould attempted to corner the market on gold?	ANSWER: Black Friday gold panic  2023 National History Bowl VJV National Championships Finals
This ruler  was  the  subject of a prophecy by Savonarola, who claimed he was God’s instrument  to purify  the  corruption  of  Florence.  This  ruler challenged  the  authority  of Maximilian  the  First  to  establish a  personal  union  with  Brittany,  and  was pushed  to  stop supporting Perkin Warbeck by Henry the Seventh. This king pursued his loose claim to the throne  of  Naples  by marching  his army  up  and  down a  certain peninsula  before  being challenged at the Fornovo. For ten points, name this “Affable” King of France who launched the Italian Wars.	ANSWER: Charles  the  Eighth of  France  (accept Charles  the  Affable or Charles l’Affable before mentioned)
Newton  D.  Baker  headed  a  board  that  exonerated  Herbert  Jermain  Slocum  for  his inability to prevent this event, which allegedly resulted in one side obtaining 80 horses and 300  rifles.  The  13th  Cavalry  Regiment  was  deployed  in  the  aftermath  of  this  event,  which sparked   the   Punitive   Expedition   into  its   leader's   country.   The   Division   of   the   North undertook this action in a town three miles north of the border with Mexico. For ten points, identify this 1916 attack carried out by Pancho Villa in a New Mexico town.	ANSWER: Battle of Columbus (accept Burning of Columbus; accept Pancho Villa's Columbus Raid or Raid on Columbus)
A 2010 redesign of this item removed the initials “VDB” from its front for the second time. During World War Two, these items were subject to a discoloring redox reaction when the chemistry-unaware Henry Morgenthau [[mohr-GEHN-thow]] authorized the addition of zinc to them. As a result, one of the most valuable examples of these items is the 1944 “steel wheat” variety. Since 2010 these items display a shield reading “e pluribus unum.” For ten points, name these coins which show Abraham Lincoln on the front.	ANSWER: U.S. penny (or pennies; prompt on "coins" until “coin” is mentioned)
During this campaign, a combined 25 American and British planes crashed, with 101 fatalities  overall.  Gail Halvorsen  dropped candy  to awaiting children during this  prolonged campaign, becoming known as the "Chocolate Flier." After the Deutsche [[DOY-chuh]] Mark was  introduced,  Soviet  troops  cut  off  road  and  rail  access  to  supply  an  occupied  city, immediately causing this event. For ten points, name this aerial campaign led by the United States to provide aid and supplies to the German capital.	ANSWER: Berlin Airlift (accept Operation Vittles; prompt on nonspecific answers)
According to Marco Polo, a ruler of this city was locked in his treasure room without food or water for neglecting to spend his gold on the city’s defense. That ruler of this city, Al- Musta’sim [[al-moo-stah-SEEM]], legendarily died after being rolled in a carpet and trampled to death by an invader’s horses. Harun al-Rashid  built  a  library  in  this  city,  which  was destroyed  in  a  1258  siege  by  Hulagu  [[hoo-LAH-goo]]  Khan.  For  ten  points,  name  this  city which contained a “House of Wisdom” before becoming the capital of modern-day Iraq.	ANSWER: Baghdad
Due to his money struggles, this philosopher was offered fifty years pay in advance by Catherine the Great to serve as her personal librarian. Pope Clement XIII [[the Thirteenth]] banned a compendium written by this man, citing its skepticism of Jesus' miracles. Alongside Jean  d'Alembert  [[dahl-ehm-BARE]],  this  man  compiled  a  "systematic  dictionary  of  the sciences, arts, and crafts." The chief editor of the Encyclopédie [[ohn-see-cloh-PEH-dee]] was, for ten points, which French philosopher?	ANSWER: Denis Diderot [[deh-NEE dih-deh-ROH]]  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 1
An early lyric by this group parodies the nativist views of Enoch Powell and demands that immigrants return to their “commonwealth homes.” This group's members took an ill- fated  trip  to  Rishikesh  [[ree-shee-KESH]]  for  a  guided  meditation  course  with  Maharishi Mahesh  Yogi.  A  member  of  this  group  left  that  course  early  to  film  the  documentary Raga about his sitar teacher, Ravi Shankar. For ten points, name this influential band of the British Invasion whose songs “Get Back” and “Norwegian Wood” were credited to John Lennon and Paul McCartney.	ANSWER: The Beatles
For  use  on  this  ship,  Louis  Casella  manufactured  a  resilient  version  of  a  Six's thermometer.  Charles  W.  Thomson  supervised  the  team  of  naturalists  aboard  this  vessel, whose equipment included over 181 miles of hemp rope. This vessel, commanded by George Nares and Frank Thomson, became the first to measure the depth of an area at the south end of the Mariana Trench. A four-year 1870s oceanographic expedition was undertaken by, for ten points, what Royal Navy vessel, after which the deepest point in the Marianas Trench was named?	ANSWER: HMS Challenger (accept Challenger Deep[/a])
English physician Thomas Sydenham wrote a 17th century manual advocating for a product  containing  this  good,  laudanum.  Soldiers  from  the  Kuomintang  organized  what became the "Golden Triangle" for production of this good while operating in Laos, Thailand and  Myanmar.  European  traders  sold  this  good  to  circumvent  the  Canton  system,  which exclusively  required  silver  be  spent  to  acquire  goods  like  tea  and  porcelain.  The  Qing [[CHING]]  and  British  empires  fought  two  wars  named  for,  for  ten  points,  what  illicit  drug later used to produce heroin?	ANSWER: Opium poppy (accept Opium Wars; accept Opium Triangle; or Opium Crescent; prompt on "Opiate")
Under these laws, a high concrete wall was used to divide off the Eight Mile-Wyoming Area. Ferris State University contains a memorabilia museum that houses artifacts related to these laws, which created a "ghetto domestic sector." These laws were almost circumvented in  the  1875  Civil  Rights  Act,  which  the  Supreme  Court  ruled  unconstitutional.  Leading  to "colored" restrooms being a norm, for ten points, what were these racial segregation laws in the Southern United States?	ANSWER: Jim Crow Laws (prompt on "Racial Segregation" or "Exclusion" before mentioned)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 1
The deflection of this element’s particles led to J. J. Thomson’s discovery of atomic isotopes. It’s not krypton, but British chemist Sir William Ramsay and Morris  W.  Travers isolated this element in 1898 and named it for the Greek word for “New.” As a byproduct of air  liquefaction,  this  element  was  shown  by  Georges  Claude  to  be  able  to  produce  light  in sealed tubes. For ten points, name this element historically used for signs in Las Vegas.	ANSWER: Neon (accept Ne before mentioned)
At the behest of Eugene Reybold, a project focused on this river employed a number of Camp Clinton-housed prisoners from the German Afrika Korps. A series of levees were built along this river in the aftermath of an event that bolstered Huey Long’s gubernatorial campaign and resulted in Herbert Hoover leading a series of relief operations. That piece of legislation  also  mandated  the  creation  of  the  Birds  Point-New  Madrid  Floodway along  this river. For ten points, name this major American river that experienced a “great” 1927 flood.	ANSWER: Mississippi River   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 1
Scholars have conjectured possible relatives of this man based on the fact that his last name means “deer”  in  Narragansett.  This  man,  who  used  the  alias  Michael  Johnson,  had  been  a  slave  of  Deacon William Brown. This man’s body lay in state in Faneuil Hall after men under Thomas Preston opened fire on a crowd that had been throwing snowballs. For ten points, name this Native American and African American patriot, the first person killed in the Boston Massacre.	ANSWER: Crispus Attucks
This  ruler  broke  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  opened  up  his  economy  to  the  West  under  his  policy of Infitah. Though he had planned the surprise attack Operation Badr, this leader was assassinated by Islamic  Jihad  because  of  his  diplomatic  efforts  with  Menachem  Begin,  with  whom  he  shared  the  1978 Nobel Peace Prize. For ten points, name this successor of Gamal Abdel Nasser as President of Egypt who signed the Camp David Accords with Israel.	ANSWER: (Muhammad) Anwar el- Sadat
Kazimir  Malevich’s  1915  painting  of  aBlackone  of  these  things  supported  an  essay  explaining  a shift “From Cubism to Suprematism.” Two of these things appear in the background of a Rembrandt self portrait that may be a reference to a legend about Giotto. One of the earliest works of abstraction, Hilma af Klint’sSvanen, is a colorful group of concentric ones of these shapes. Medieval European art frequently depicts God creating the world by using a compass to draw, for ten points, what basic, round shape?	ANSWER: circle(accept  BlackCircle;  acceptdisk)  (Note:  Legendarily,  Giotto  was  asked  by  Pope Benedict XI to demonstrate his artistic skill, so he drew a perfect circle with a single motion.)
Causes of this war included the execution of the crew of theVirginius. During this war, hundreds of soldiers died thanks to Russell Alger’s cut-rate rations in the Embalmed Beef scandal. Frederic Remington was told to furnish pictures so that William Randolph Hearst could furnish this war, which was supported by yellow journalism. The sinking of the USSMainehelped trigger, for ten points, what war between the US and a European falling power in 1898?	ANSWER: Spanish-AmericanWar
In 1947, this team’s GM Billy Evans wrote “TRUST YOU WILL FIND YOUR NEW CONNECTION A MOST PROFITABLE ONE” in an antisemitic telegram telling Jewish-American star Hank Greenberg he’d been given away to the Pittsburgh Pirates. In 1912, a player for this team shouted “I don’t care if he got no feet!” when fans tried to get him to stop beating a handicapped man who had been heckling him; that player’s career hits record was broken by Pete Rose. The notoriously racist Ty Cobb played over two decades with, for ten points, what Major League Baseball team in Michigan?	ANSWER: DetroitTigers(accept either or both names) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
This man was assassinated by Cassius Chaeraea after attempting to permanently move to Alexandria. This  man  may  have  gone  mad  after  the  death  of  Julia  Drusilla,  leading  to  rumors  that  he  appointed Incitatus as a state official. This son of Germanicus was affectionately called “little boot” by the legions. Tiberius  was  succeeded  as  emperor  by,  for  ten  points,  what  Roman  emperor  who  supposedly  made  his horse a consul?	ANSWER: Caligula(acceptGaiusCaesar;  acceptGaiusJuliusCaesarAugustusGermanicus; do not prompt on Caesar alone)
During  a  visit  to  this  country,  one  psychologist  stated  that  his  only  goal  was  to  “catch  sight  of  a porcupine;” that trip led Sigmund Freud to conclude that this country “was a mistake.” A psychologist from this country developed the ideas of habit, will, and stream of consciousness in his bookPrinciples of  Psychology;  that  man  also  wrote  the  bookPragmatism.  For  ten  points,  name  this  home  country  of William James, who was a professor at Harvard.	ANSWER: UnitedStatesof America (orUSA; acceptAmerica)
Investigations  of  this  event  included  the  Hoey  Report,  which  was  criticized  by  the  U.S.  Navy’s Crittenden Report. A slur by Everett Dirksen inspired the popular name for this event, in which President Eisenhower’s Executive Order 10450 led to numerous firings of “subversives” from the State Department. Roy Cohn was accused of being closeted during, for ten points, what 1950s “scare” regarding homosexuals in the US Government?	ANSWER: LavenderScare (acceptLavenderLads, the slur by Dirksen; prompt on descriptive answers)
In  this  city,  after  the  deaths  of  Echol  Cole  and  Robert  Walker  in  garbage  compactors  sparked  a sanitation  strike,  the  Mason  Temple  became  the  site  of  the  “I’ve  Been  to  the  Mountaintop”  speech  on April  3,  1968.  The  next  day  at  this  city’s  Lorraine  Motel,  James  Earl  Ray  shot  and  killed  the  orator of  that  speech.  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.  was  assassinated  in,  for  ten  points,  what  second-largest  city  in Tennessee?	ANSWER: Memphis
This country, the only non-microstate in Europe that did not sign the Helsinki Accords, executed a  priest  for  baptizing  a  child  in  1971,  four  years  after  it  declared  itself  the  world’s  first  atheist  state. Hundreds of thousands of concrete bunkers were built in this country during the Cold War under Enver Hoxha,  who  replaced  King  Zog  as  its  leader.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Balkan  country  where,  in  1991, communism fell in Tirana.	ANSWER: Albania Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
As  part  of  Operation  PANDORA,  this  organization  tried  to  stir  up  anti-Semitism  by  mailing  out racist fake pamphlets of right-wing Jewish organizations to civil rights organizations. This organization, which often collaborated with GRU, was led by Vladimir Kryuchkov, who helped plan an August 1991 coup. During the fall of the Berlin Wall, thousands of this organization’s files were burned by its officers, including Vladimir Putin. For ten points, name this Soviet intelligence agency.	ANSWER: KGB(orKomitetGosudarstvennoyBezopasnosti;  acceptCommitteeforState Security)
In  1894,  kids  accidentally  started  a  fire  under  the  stands  in  this  city’s  South  End  Grounds  during a  baseball  game;  the  stadium  and  over  100  buildings  were  destroyed  in  the  ensuing  Great  Roxbury Fire.  This  city  lost  over  60  acres  worth  of  buildings  in  12  hours  after  a  warehouse  on  Kingston  Street caught fire in 1872; that event was commemorated by its resident poet, Oliver Wendell Holmes Senior. In 1919, 21 people died after a storage tank burst and released a flood of molasses in, for ten points, what Massachusetts city?	ANSWER: Boston
This  man’s  philosophy  notably  clashed  with  that  of  his  contemporary,  Antoine-Henri  Jomini.  One of this thinker’s students applied his philosophy at the Battle of Sedan; that student was Helmuth von Moltke.  This  man  defined  war  as  “the  continuation  of  politics  by  other  means,”  and  he  described  the confusion during “the fog of war” in his most famous work. For ten points, name this distinguished 19th century Prussian military strategist who wroteOn War.	ANSWER: Carl von Clausewitz
A student of this university named Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander was the first African American woman  to  receive  a  Ph.D.  A  machine  known  as  the  “Giant  Brain”  was  created  at  this  university  to calculate  artillery  firing  tables;  that  early  computer  was  ENIAC.  The  oldest  medical  school  created  in America  is  this  university’s  Perelman  School,  and  it  is  also  home  to  the  first  school  of  business,  which is named after Joseph Wharton. For ten points, name this university founded by Benjamin Franklin in Philadelphia.	ANSWER: University of Pennsylvania(accept UPenn; do not accept Penn State)
This artist painted his friend Adrianus Jacobus Zuyderland dressed in blue with his head in his hands inAt Eternity’s Gate, which shares its name with a 2018 film about this man. A landscape painting by this  artist  depicts  a  cypress  tree  and  a  crescent  moon  over  the  town  of  Saint-Remy.  This  artist  ofThe Potato Eaterswas hospitalized in Arles after injuring himself with a razor in 1888. For ten points, name this Dutch artist ofStarry NightandSelf Portrait with Bandaged Ear.	ANSWER: Vincent (Willem) vanGogh Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
Prior  to  this  battle,  one  side  lost  control  of  the  Crampton  and  Turner  passes  during  the  Battle  of South  Mountain,  nearly  leading  them  to  terminate  their  campaign.  The  losing  side  in  this  battle  was hampered when Special Order 191 was discovered, wrapped in cigars, by the enemy. After a costly seizure of  the  Bloody  Lane,  George  McClellan  failed  to  press  his  advantage  at  this  battle,  leading  Lincoln  to replace him with Ambrose Burnside. For ten points, name this 1862 Maryland battle, the bloodiest single day of the Civil War.	ANSWER: Battle of Antietam
This  man  returned  to  power  after  the  scandal  of  the  Lavon  Affair,  a  botched  false-flag  bombing operation.  Ahdut  HaAvoda  was  founded  by  this  man,  who  ordered  the  formation  of  Unit  101  and organized  a  massive  airlift  in  Operation  Magic  Carpet  as  Prime  Minister.  During  his  second  term,  this man launched an invasion of Egypt, precipitating the Suez Crisis. For ten points, name this first prime minister of Israel.	ANSWER: David Ben-Gurion
This man rose to power after scheming with the Comte de Chevigny [comtdesheh-vi-nee] to remove Fran ̧cois  de  Noyers[fran-swahdeno-yay].  The  League  of  the  Rhine  was  formed  by  this  man  to  limit Austrian power. This man concluded a war with Spain through the Treaty of the Pyrenees. This advisor barely survived a coup during the Fronde. For ten points, name this cardinal who acted as minister for Louis XIII and regent for Louis XIV.	ANSWER: Cardinal JulesMazarin
In a series of documents related to this scandal, William Rehnquist was referred to as “Renchburg;” the  existence  of  those  documents  was  publicly  revealed  by  Alexander  Butterfield.  John  Mitchell  served 19 months in prison for his role in this scandal, which included Robert Bork’s agreement to fire special prosecutor Archibald Cox during the Saturday Night Massacre. The “Smoking Gun” tape was a key piece of evidence in, for ten points, what scandal that ended with Richard Nixon’s resignation?	ANSWER: Watergatescandal
On  this  island,  Marco  Bragadin  was  infamously  flayed  alive  after  leading  a  heroic  defense  of Famagusta  to  delay  the  Ottoman  Empire  prior  to  Lepanto.  Joan  of  England  was  captured  by  this island’s ruler Isaac Komnenos, prompting Richard I to invade it. This country’s modern Enosis movement prompted Operation Atilla, an invasion that helped extend this country’s Green Line of demarcation. For ten points, name this island country divided between Turkish and Greek zones.	ANSWER:Cyprus Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
Prior to coining this three-word phrase, the organization that developed it controversially referred to one of its subjects as a “nincompoop.” An iconic image displaying this phrase shows a man traveling by train from Independence, Missouri to Washington DC. A forecast by Arthur Sears Henning inspired this phrase, a prediction made after polls indicated a Democratic defeat in the 1948 election. For ten points, name this false headline published by theChicago Daily Tribune.	ANSWER: DeweyDefeatsTruman
A ruler of this city has a dream in which he sees a statue with a gold head, a bronze belly, and clay feet. A Biblical figure partially named for this city is described as sitting on top of a scarlet beast with seven heads and ten horns. The Book of Ezekiel was composed while Ezekiel was in this city, which names a whore encountered in the Book of Revelation. The Book of Daniel tells of Nebuchadnezzar II, the ruler of, for ten points, what city where the Jews were held in a namesake period of captivity?	ANSWER: Babylon(accept Whore ofBabylon; acceptBabylonian Captivity)
This  modern  day  country  obtained  de  facto  independence  from  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  after  the Swabian  War.  France  obtained  Burgundy  shortly  after  Charles  the  Bold  died  fighting  a  force  primarily from  this  country  at  the  Battle  of  Nancy.  German  Landsknechts  imitated  pike  and  halberd-wielding mercenaries from this country, whose neutrality was affirmed during the Thirty Years War. For ten points, name this Alpine country with capital at Bern that remained neutral in both world wars.	ANSWER: Switzerland(accept OldSwissConfederacy)
This composer likely hired horn players from Bohemia for the premiere of a piece whose first suite, in F major, includes an “Adagio e staccato” movement. This composer included “La Paix” [lapay] in a suite for wind band written to celebrate the Treaty of Aix-La-Chapelle, and he included hornpipes in a piece written for a concert for King George I held on a barge on the Thames. For ten points, name this German-born English composer ofMusic for the Royal FireworksandWater Music.	ANSWER: George FriedrichHandel
A politician with this surname campaigned with a Frankenstein doll that declared “You have nothing to fear with” that man. A woman with this surname won the Senate seat made available by the retirement of  Jesse  Helms;  that  woman  with  this  married  surname  served  as  Secretary  of  Transportation  under Ronald Reagan and Secretary of Labor under George W. Bush. For ten points, give this surname shared by North Carolina senator Elizabeth and a Kansas senator who lost the 1996 presidential election to Bill Clinton, Bob.	ANSWER: Dole(accept ElizabethDole; accept BobDole) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
This man said “I am very sorry it is taking me so long to die” after attempting suicide during his arrest.  The  Imperial  Rule  Assistance  Political  Association  was  created  by  this  man,  who  suggested  not executing the pilots of the Doolittle Raid in fear of American retaliation. After being arrested, this man was given a new pair of dentures which had the phrase “remember Pearl Harbor” written in Morse Code. For ten points, name this politician who served as Japan’s Prime Minister from 1941 to 1944.	ANSWER: Hideki Tojo
This thinker’s concept of the “efficient cause” in the natural world was continued by his successor, Theophrastus. A graded scale of perfection established by this man to classify living organisms is known as  his  “Great  Chain  of  Being.”  This  philosopher,  who  was  exiled  by  Eurymedon  the  Hierophant,  was accused by Hagnothemis of poisoning his most famous pupil, Alexander the Great. For ten points, name this Ancient Greek founder of the Lyceum and student of Plato.	ANSWER:Aristotle
Andrew  Oliver  was  tasked  with  implementing  this  act,  after  which  he  was  burned  in  effigy  by  the Loyal  Nine.  Thomas  Hutchinson’s  mansion  was  ransacked  in  response  to  this  act.  Isaac  Barre  coined the  term  “sons  of  liberty”  during  a  debate  over  this  act,  which  prompted  Samuel  Adams  to  found  the Sons of Liberty. When this act was repealed alongside a reduced Sugar Act, Britain also passed the 1766 Declaratory Act. For ten points, name this colonial tax on printed material.	ANSWER: StampAct of 1765
Edouard  de  Laboulaye  proposed  this  structure  as  an  international  effort.  After  this  structure  was completed on Bedloe’s Island, it was celebrated with its city’s first ticker-tape parade. This monument’s base  features  an  Emma  Lazarus  poem  with  the  verses  “give  me  your  tired,  your  poor,  your  huddled masses” called “The New Colossus.” For ten points, name this Frederic Bartholdi-designed sculpture that bears a copper torch in New York Harbor.	ANSWER: StatueofLiberty(orLibertyEnlighteningtheWorld; accept LaLibert ́e ́ Eclairant leMonde)
One leader in these conflicts saw a vision of three suns before his victory at Mortimer’s Cross. For switching  sides  in  these  conflicts,  Richard  Neville,  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  was  known  as  the  Kingmaker. These conflicts ended when Richard III was defeated by Henry VII at Bosworth, ushering in the Tudor dynasty.  For  ten  points,  name  these  conflicts  between  the  rival  English  houses  of  Lancaster  and  York, named for their respective red and white flower badges.	ANSWER: Wars of the Roses Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
Pope Alexander II allegedly gave a papal banner to the winner of this battle as a sign of support. The losing side in this battle had earlier been forced to face Harald Hardrada at Stamford Bridge. The housecarls took a defensive position upon the Senlac Hill during this battle, though they could not prevent Harold Godwinson from being hit in the eye by an arrow, as depicted in the Bayeux Tapestry. For ten points, name this 1066 victory for William the Conqueror.	ANSWER: Battle of Hastings
A mint was established in this state at Dahlonega in the wake of an 1830s gold rush. During fighting in this state, Joseph Johnston was removed from command for his failure at Kennesaw Mountain. During the War of Jenkins’ Ear, this state’s St. Simons Island was the site of the Battle of Bloody Marsh. This state arrested Samuel Worcester for living in Cherokee territory within it. William Tecumseh Sherman’s March to the Sea ended with the capture of, for ten points, what southern state’s city of Savannah?	ANSWER: Georgia
This  man  gained  a  nickname  after  he  insulted  Frank  Galluccio’s  sister  and  was  attacked.  Frankie Yale mentored this man, an opponent of Adelard Cunin and the target of Eliot Ness’ Untouchables unit. Though this man’s agents attempted to kill Bugs Moran during the Saint Valentine’s Day massacre, this man was ultimately jailed for tax evasion. For ten points, name this Prohibition-era gangster, known as Scarface, who led the 1920s era Chicago Outfit.	ANSWER: Alphonse “Al” Capone(prompt on “Scarface” before mentioned)
This country was known as French Sudan in the colonial era and it entered into a short-lived federation with  Senegal  in  1960.  A  recent  Tuareg  rebellion  in  the  north  of  this  country  proclaimed  the  state  of Azawad with its capital at Gao. This country is named for an empire that was founded by Sundiata. The Ghana Empire once ruled in what is now, for ten points, what arid West African country, the home of Timbuktu and Bamako?	ANSWER: Republic of Mali
Description  acceptable.  Stephen  Roberts’  “historical  induction”  argument  argues  against  this philosophical  position.  Alvin  Plantinga  argues  for  this  philosophical  position  based  on  neo-Aristotelian models of modal logic. The “Ultimate Boeing 747 Gambit” was used to attack the watchmaker argument for this position by Richard Dawkins, one of the “Four Horsemen” who fought against it. Atheists reject, for ten points, what belief in the presence of a deity?	ANSWER: the existenceofGod(accept descriptions referring to theexistenceof one or moregods and equivalents; prompt on partial answers) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
This  color  partially  names  a  munitions  depot  in  Jersey  City  that  was  bombed  by  German  agents during World War I. Cesar Chavez’s United Farm Workers was symbolized by an eagle of this color. A political  organization  partially  named  for  this  color  instituted  the  Free  Breakfast  for  Children  program in Oakland and was founded by Bobby Seale and Huey Newton. For ten points, identify this color that names a militant Panther political party.	ANSWER: black(acceptBlackTom Explosion; acceptBlackEagle; acceptBlackPanthers)
The  Indestructibles  were  a  pair  of  stars  considered  only  accessible  by  these  figures.  The  action  of raising  the  djed[jed]  was  performed  to  honor  them  at  a  celebration  sometimes  called  the  Feast  of  the Tail.  That  event,  the  Heb  Sed,  allowed  one  of  these  figures  to  establish  the  Amarna  heresy.  They  were the pre-eminent preservers of the fundamental order of the universe, a concept known as Maat. One of these people mandated worship of a sun-disk known as Aten, and concurrently changed his own name to Akhenaten. For ten points, name these semi-divine rulers of ancient Egypt.	ANSWER: ancient Egyptian pharaohs
This ruler put down a revolt in Ghent against his sister, Mary of Hungary. The Battle of Villalar was one episode in an uprising against this man called the Revolt of the Comuneros. He renounced his claim to Burgundy in the “Ladies’ Peace” of Cambrai. His army captured Francis I at the Battle of Pavia, and he condemned Martin Luther at the Diet of Worms. For ten points, name this man who ruled as Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain.	ANSWER: CharlesV(acceptCharlesIofSpainorCharlesIofAustria; prompt on Charles; do not accept or prompt on Charles I alone)
This group’s Comrade Duch [doyk] ran a high school-turned-prison camp known as S-21. This group gained support after allying with Norodom Sihanouk in an attempt to overthrow Lon Nol. After escaping this  group,  Dith  Pran  exposed  their  policy  of  mass  murder  in  the  “killing  fields.”  Under  Pol  Pot,  this group attempted to transform its country into an agrarian society. For ten points, name this Communist regime that briefly controlled Cambodia.	ANSWER: KhmerRouge
In June 2016, this figure lined up a “sweet summer gig” installing above-ground swimming pools. He once asked a colleague to get him “some of those real throwing stars” while on a diplomatic trip to Japan; in  December  2016,  this  man  forged  that  colleague’s  signature  on  an  executive  order  naming  December “Dokken History Month.” For ten points, name this politician, nicknamed “Diamond Joe” according to the last eight years ofOnionarticles about the hijinks of America’s “President of Vice.”	ANSWER: ”Diamond” Joe Biden(prompt on “Diamond Joe” before mentioned) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
People affected by this phenomenon founded the Last Man Club, and one attempt to fix it was the Shelterbelt Project.  This disaster was named in the aftermath of Black Sunday and was preceded by the “great  plow-up.”  Many  individuals  affected  by  this  period’s  “black  blizzards”  migrated  along  Route  66 to California’s Central Valley, where they were branded as “Okies”.  For ten points, name this ecological disaster during the Great Depression in which drought caused storms of topsoil across the southern Great Plains.	ANSWER: DustBowl
Carl Peters’ attempt to implement cotton quotas in this modern day country led to the Maji Maji Rebellion.   The  Chama  Cha  Mapinduzi  party  holds  power  in  this  country  and  was  once  led  by  a  man who promoted “ujaama” with the Arusha Declaration.  The annexation of this country’s Kagera province led this country to defeat and depose Idi Amin in neighboring Uganda.  Julius Nyerere once led, for ten points, what African country formed in 1964 from the merger of Tanganyika and Zanzibar?	ANSWER: Tanzania
During one of these events, a Cheyenne tribe killed a white buffalo and inscribed a peace treaty on its skin.  A Roman tradition during one of these events involved a procession honoring the fertility god Priapus; that event is also known as the “Tears of Saint Lawrence.” Giovanni Schiaparelli proved that one of these events is caused by a trail of debris from the Tempel-Tuttle comet entering Earth’s atmosphere. The Perseids and Leonids are examples of, for ten points, what astronomical events in which streaks of light cross the sky?	ANSWER: meteorshowers (acceptLeonids and/orPerseids before mentioned)
A popular myth about these people was promulgated by the Geatish Society during the early 19th century.  Charles the Simple bought off these people with the Treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte.  These people were responsible for the destruction and looting of the Lindisfarne abbey in 793, and they raided much of Northern and Western Europe by traveling in longships.  For ten points, name these Germanic people, whose rulers included Canute the Great, who were notorious for their pillaging.	ANSWER: Vikings
This country’s 1974 Eurovision entry, “And After the Farewell,” was used by the MFA to signal the start of a revolution against Marcello Caetano.  In that revolution, flowers were placed in gun barrels, as only four citizens of this country were killed as Antonio Salazar’s Estado Novo was overthrown.  For ten points, name this country, which granted independence to Angola and Mozambique in 1975, a year after the Carnation Revolution peacefully brought a military junta to power in Lisbon.	ANSWER: Portugal Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 1
The  Neutral  White  Cross  was  established  to  provide  medical  relief  during  this  period.   The  U.S. intervened to stop the German shipYpirangafrom arming militants in this conflict.  Venustiano Carranza held the Convention of Aguascalientes during this period, which was ushered in by the Plan of San Luis Potosi.  The Ten Tragic Days, which resulted in the assassination of Francisco Madero, took place during, for  ten  points,  what  decade-long  revolution  that  began  with  the  ousting  of  Porfirio  Diaz  and  whose military actions ended with the pacification of Pancho Villa?	ANSWER: MexicanRevolution
Charles Ogle supported this man’s candidacy with the Gold Spoon Oration,  though his detractors called  him  “granny.”  A  newspaper  editorial  critical  of  this  man  inspired  his  supporters’  “log  cabin  and hard cider” campaign.  His 1811 victory over a group of Shawnee Indians led to his party’s adoption of the slogan “Tippecanoe and Tyler Too”.  For ten points, what Whig defeated Martin van Buren in the 1840 election but died of pneumonia a month after his inauguration?	ANSWER: William HenryHarrison
This composer wrote the cantataGloria e Imeneofor Louis XV’s wedding and celebrated the defense of Corfu with the oratorioJuditha triumphans.  Violas depict a barking sheepdog in one of his concertos, which was originally published with explanatory sonnets inThe Contest Between Harmony and Invention. This violinst composed many of his works for a girl’s orphanage in Venice and was known as the “Red Priest.” for ten points, name this Baroque composer who depicted Spring in hisFour Seasons.	ANSWER: Antonio Vivaldi
Stone slabs were harvested from this body of water by “stonehookers” in Port Credit and other towns. The Scarborough Bluffs lie on the northwest shore of this body of water, whose northeast was connected in 1832 by the Rideau Canal to the Ottawa River.  The Niagara River connects this body of water to Lake Erie.  Toronto lies on, for ten points, what smallest Great Lake by area, named for a Canadian province?	ANSWER: LakeOntario
A  2003  example  of  this  action  led  to  the  Supreme  Court  caseLULAC  v.   Perry.Shaw  v.   Reno banned  attempts  to  do  this  solely  based  on  race,  and  it  makes  use  of  “packing”  and  “cracking.”  This practice  took  its  name  from  America’s  fifth  Vice  President,  who  while  as  Governor  of  Massachusetts enacted a district whose elongated shape reminded opponents of a salamander.  For ten points, name this practice of drawing electoral districts for partisan advantage.	ANSWER:gerrymandering (prompt on “redistricting” before “Vice President”)
This institution was established after its founder dreamed of having a discussion with Aristotle. This institution  was  supported  by  the  "Sons  of  Moses,"  who  produced  the Book  of  Ingenious  Devices.  One movement of this institution was supported by Hunayn, the "Sheikh of the Translators," and this institution flourished from the eighth to the thirteenth century until its destruction in a siege by Hulagu Khan. For ten points,  identify  this  Abbasid  center  of  education  and  learning,  an  emblem  of  the  Islamic  Golden  Age  in Baghdad.	ANSWER: House of Wisdom (accept Grand Library of Baghdad before mentioned)
In  both  2015  and  2016,  the  world's  top  ranked  teams  in  this  game,  from  Monaco  and  Israel,  had players  banned  for  life  for  cheating.  For  decades,  the  Egyptian  actor  Omar  Sharif  was  ranked  among  this game's  top-25  players.  It's  not  baseball,  but  a  "grand  slam"  can  be  achieved  in  this  card  game,  which  was invented on a cruise ship by Anderson Cooper's great-uncle, Harold Vanderbilt. This trick-taking card game is  unusual  for  dealing  the  entire  52-card  deck  each  hand.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  card  game,  whose variants include "contract" and "auction."	ANSWER: Bridge (accept Contract Bridge; or Auction Bridge)
One-eyed  giants,  called  Arimaspi,  fought  gold-guarding  griffins  in  this  place,  which  was  home  to  a prophet and healer named Abaris, who traveled the world with a magic arrow. Pythagoras claimed to be an aspect of Apollo from this place, which is where Apollo was said to spend his winters. The sun shines for 24 hours a day in this utopian place, which was thought to be located far beyond Thrace. For ten points, what Greek mythological region was named for being located beyond the land of the god of the north wind?	ANSWER: Hyperborea (prompt on "Boreas")
A  man  of  this  name  from  Citium  founded  a  philosophy  which  states  virtue  is  sufficient  to  achieve eudaimonia. This name is used by a man who engages in a dialogue with Socrates in Parmenides. That man with this name was a philosopher of the Eleatic school who made a series of paradoxes such as Achilles and the  tortoise  and  the  flying  arrow  to  demonstrate  the  impossibility  of  motion.  For  ten  points,  identify  this name that was borne by the founder of the Stoic school of philosophy.	ANSWER: Zeno (accept Zeno of Citium or Zeno of Elea)
Abasalom  Auston Townsend  had  a  wagon  train  fight  on  this  route,  whose  namesake  was  killed  by Tom Cover or Nelson Story's hired killer, Thomas Kent. This route, which was established by Allen Hurlbut and  scouted  by  John  Jacobs,  sometimes  followed  the  Bridger  Trail  and  paralleled  Native  American  routes across  the  Powder  River  Country.  Red  Cloud's  war  halted  the  use  of,  for  ten  points,  what  route  which connected the state of Wyoming to a namesake city in southern Montana?	ANSWER: Bozeman Trail  2023-24 HS National History Bowl  Round 15 2
This  person  led  a  last  stand  against  British  police  following  the  death  of  Moshe  Rosenfeld  and  the discovery of weapons on the Leopold Two in the Cement Incident. Supporters of this person carried out the Anabta Shooting, and Leila Khaled declared that her generation would finish this person's rebellion. Marwan Issa has led a group named for this person, who created the Jihadist Black Hand. For ten points, name this Arab nationalist and opponent of Zionism, who names the military wing of Hamas which made headlines on October 7th.	ANSWER: Izz ad-Din al-Qassam [[kah-SAHM]] (accept Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades; accept Al-Qassam Brigades; accept Qassam Rocket; prompt on "IQB")
In this historian's "Dialogue on Politics," they claimed that the citizens of international states should fulfill their unique moral character. This author of a set of Histories of the Latin and Teutonic Peoples from 1494  to  1514 supported  Friedrich  Carl  von  Savigny  [[ZAH-vee-gnee]]  against  Georg  Wilhelm  Friedrich Hegel's theories of universal history. This supporter of the Göttingen [[GER-ting-en]] School set standards for future historians, such as emphasis on narrative history. Considered a founder of source-based history, for ten points, who was this German historian?	ANSWER: Leopold von Ranke [[RAHN-kuh]] (accept phonetic pronunciations)
This person twice served as register of the US treasury, first nominated by President Garfield in 1881 and again by President McKinley in 1897. As a senator, this politician advocated for a bill that would promote an  investigation  into  political  conditions  in  their  home  state,  following  the  1875  Clinton  Riot.  The  first African-American to receive votes at a national nominating convention in 1880 and the first to serve a full term as a US senator, for ten points, who was this Republican politician from Mississippi?	ANSWER: Blanche Bruce (or Blanche Kelso Bruce)
This  work  ended  with  sixteen  questions,  which  were  stated  in  the  negative and  were  expanded  to include a query that led to the study of chemical affinity. In this work, an analysis of ring-like interference patterns was published after Robert Hooke died, and this work, the second book on physical science written by  the  author  of  the Principia [[prin-KIP-ee-ah]],  introduces  a  theory  for  multiple-prism  dispersion. Published in 1704 and written by Isaac Newton, for ten points, what is this work on the nature of light?	ANSWER: Opticks (or Opticks: or, A Treatise of the Reflexions, Refractions, Inflexions and Colours of Light)
When writing this script, a tablet would need to be rotated 180 degrees when switching lines. This script, whose stylized characters may represent crawfish, palms, and frigatebirds, became extinct following the  kidnapping  of  Pacific  Islanders  by  Peruvian  blackbird  ships.  This  writing  system,  found  on reimiro ornaments and a statue of the birdman tangata manu, is likely the only native script of Polynesia. Once used on Easter Island, for ten points, what is this undeciphered writing system?	ANSWER: Rongorongo  2023-24 HS National History Bowl  Round 15 3
During the Tang dynasty, Li Sigong, a warlord of this ethnic group, was granted control of the Dingnan Jiedushi [[JEE-EH-DOO-SHEE]], northeast of the homeland of these people in Qinghai [[CHING-HAI]]. In the 1030s,  these  people  conquered  the  Uygher  [[WEE-guhr]]  Kingdom  of  Ganzhou  [[GAHN-ZHOO]]  as  they formed their empire, the eastern neighbors of which were the Khitan Liao [[KEE-tahn LEE-OW]] and Jurchen Jin. Nearly annihilated by the Mongol conquest of their empire in Western Xia [[SHEE-AH]], for ten points, who were these Sino-Tibetan people of Medieval China?	ANSWER: Tangut (accept Tangut Empire; accept Qiang before "Ganzhou" is mentioned; prompt on "Western Xia")
After this person urged a naval buildup and alliance with Persia, they faked the death of their enemy's son to provoke a revolt by Thebes. Only this person dared to speak after Phocis [[FOH-keess]] was taken, a feat made possible by fixing their lisp through speaking with a mouthful of pebbles. Cicero [[SISS-eh-roh]] used the name of a northern enemy, whom this person called "the barbarian," in the Athenian Assembly to describe speeches made in opposition to a certain ruler. For ten points, name this orator, who opposed Philip the Second.	ANSWER: Demosthenes [[dem-AHSS-theh-neez]] (accept phonetic pronunciations)
Before  he  became  vice  president,  this  man  lived  with  an  enslaved  woman  named Julia  Chinn  as  his  common-law  wife.  This  man's  vice  presidency  proved  such  a  political liability  that  the  sitting president  chose  to  forego  a  running  mate  in  his  bid  for  reelection. This man's initial fame resulted from his performance at the Battle of the Thames [[TEMZ]]. For ten points, name this politician who claimed to have killed Tecumseh.	ANSWER: Richard Mentor Johnson (prompt on "Johnson")
Jean  Louvet  and  Tanneguy  du  Chastel  assassinated  one  leader  of  this  polity  on  a bridge in Montereau. The Armagnac [[AR-man-YACK]] faction went to war with this polity, which was once ruled by a man known as "the Fearless." The expansion of gunpowder's use in European warfare is partly credited to a leader of this polity named Philip the Bold. The Battle  of  Nancy  brought  an  end  to  a  conflict  named  after,  for  ten  points,  what  duchy  of France that was led by Charles the Bold?	ANSWER: Duchy of Burgundy (accept Ducatus Burgundiae; accept Duché de Bourgogne; accept Hertogdom Bourgondië)
During  a  debate  over  this  conflict,  one  admiral  argued  that  kangaroos  must  be considered birds when they “hop” if the other side’s argument was  allowed.  After  Hermes Lima declared that one side had engaged in “an act of hostility” during this conflict, his navy captured  the Cassiopée. João  Goulart  used  warships  during  this  conflict  in  an  effort  to protect his nation’s territorial waters. For ten points, name this early 1960’s diplomatic crisis  in  which  Brazil  and  France  nearly  went  to  war  over  the  right  to  harvest  a  marine crustacean.	ANSWER: Lobster War (or Lobster Operation)
A  bronze  bust  of  this  man  in  Sheep  Meadow  was  unveiled  during  a ceremony  in which  William  Cullen  Bryant  gave  a  speech.  This  man  published The  Apostleship  of  the People while exiled in London. This man faced internment in Savona the year after he joined a secret society called the Carbonari. Karl Marx opposed the ideas of this man, who laid the foundation  for  modern  European  republicanism.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  Genoese revolutionary who founded the Young Italy movement.	ANSWER: Giuseppe Mazzini  2023 National History Bowl VJV National Championships Finals 2
One  historical  figure  in  this  poem  has  "resigned  his  part  /  In  the  casual  comedy." The  author's  lack  of  a  strong  connection  with  certain  political  figures  is  demonstrated  in this poem with "polite meaningless words." This poem's reference to a man who "rode our winged horse" is a description of Patrick Pearse. Following a series of executions, the author of this poem claims "All changed, changed utterly: A terrible beauty is born." For ten points, name this W.B. Yeats poem set during an Irish uprising.	ANSWER: "Easter, 1916"
In 1958, the United States Atomic Energy Commission was relocated to a city of this name in order to be far enough away from Washington D.C. in case of an attack. Residents of an  area  of  this  name  signed  a  1688  Petition  Against  Slavery.  Those  Quakers  inhabited  an area  of  this  name  where  William  Howe  and  George  Washington  fought  in  the  aftermath  of the   Battle   of   Brandywine.   For   ten   points,   give   this   name   of   a former   town-turned neighborhood of Philadelphia whose early settlers came from the Rhineland.	ANSWER: Germantown
Along  with  the Diana and  the  namesake  of  its  class,  this  ship  was  one  of  three Pallada cruisers.  Oskar  Enkvist  was  a  commander  of  this  ship,  which  was  attacked  while docked in Oranienbaum during World War Two. This ship was sent as part of a “reinforcing squadron” to a  concession  in  China during  an  early  twentieth-century  conflict  with  Japan. After  firing  a  blank  above  a  crowd,  a  group  surrounding  this  ship  stormed  the  Winter Palace. That incident involving this ship was an immediate cause of the October Revolution. For ten points, name this cruiser, the oldest commissioned Russian naval vessel.	ANSWER: Aurora (accept Avrora)
Josiah Bushnell Grinnell claimed that he was the addressee of the earliest instance of this four-word quote,  which  was  followed  by  a  statement  about  "idlers  and  imbeciles.” A note about the disgustingness of dust in Washington D.C. precedes a printed instance of this quote,  which  was  followed  by  the  clause  "and  grow  up  with  the  country."  That  1865 instance of this quote appeared in a daily publication edited by the man who said it. Printed in  the New-York  Tribune by  Horace  Greeley,  for  ten  points,  what  is  this  quote  urging listeners to travel in a certain direction?	ANSWER: “Go West, Young Man”  2023 National History Bowl VJV National Championships Finals 3
This  man  sent  a  letter  to  Hipólito  Yrigoyen [[EE-rih-GOY-en]] titled  "Plan  for Realizing Bolívar's Dream.” This one-time  employee  of  Charles  Butters  used  the  term “Colossus of the North” to refer to the United States and led an attack on Telpaneca, in which  his supporters  attacked  marines  with  machetes.  Often seen  in  wide-brimmed  boots, this  man  inspired  a  movement  that  opposed  the  Somoza  family  and  would  later  run  a nationwide  literacy  campaign.  For  ten  points,  identify  this man,  the inspiration  for  a socialist political party in Nicaragua.	ANSWER: Augusto César Sandino (accept Augusto Nicolás Calderón de Sandino y José de María Sandino; prompt on "Sandinistas")
In 2000, this son of Lone Man was posthumously inducted into the Nebraska Hall of Fame, 91 years after he died on the Pine Ridge Reservation. This man, considered by some to  be  the  most-photographed  American  Indian,  first  posed  for  Matthew  Brady  before meeting  with  President  Grant  in  1872.  This  man  signed  the  Treaty  of  Fort  Laramie,  after which  he  led  the  Oglala.  The  Fetterman  Fight was  fought  during  a  war  named  for,  for  ten points, name this Lakota Sioux chief.	ANSWER: Red Cloud (or Maȟpíya Lúta; accept Red Cloud's War)
The  discovery  of chicken bones  of a  specific  breed suggests  these  people may  have had contact with the Mapuche people in the 14th century. Naturalist Joseph Banks hired one of  these  people,  Tupaia  [[too-pah-EE-ah]],  to  serve  as  navigator  on  the Endeavour. These people used a specific type of outrigger boat known as the ama, which they used to colonize the modern-day countries of New Zealand and Hawaii. The Pacific Ocean was traversed by, for ten points, which Oceanic people whose subgroups include the Maori and Samoans?	ANSWER: Polynesians (prompt on specific groups like "Samoan(s)", "Maori", or "Hawaiian(s)" before mentioned)
After  living  in  self-imposed  exile  in  Europe,  this  man  returned  to  the  U.S.  to  marry Eliza Jumel, while using his mother’s maiden name of “Edwards.” Due to this lawyer's previous  failed  lease  of  the  Bastrop  Tract  from  the  Spanish  government  in  present-day Louisiana, he was tried and acquitted of treason. After losing a gubernatorial election for New York, this man challenged a former Secretary of the Treasury to a duel. For ten points, name this vice president under Thomas Jefferson who shot and killed Alexander Hamilton.	ANSWER: Aaron Burr Jr.
The  first  engagement  in  this  war  began  in  Wallachia  at  the  Battle  of  Oltenita.  This war's Danubian phase ended when Omar Pasha defeated Prince Gorchakov at Silistria. In one battle  in  this  war,  only  the  ship Taif [[TAH-eef]]  escaped  an  attack  by  Pavel  Nakhimov  at Sinope [[SIH-noh-pee]]. This war included battles at Malakoff redoubt and the Great Redan by French and British forces as part of the Siege of Sevastopol, an effort to capture the Tsar's Black Sea Fleet. For ten points, name this 1853 to 1856 war between Russia and an Ottoman- European coalition.	ANSWER: Crimean War
During a 1980s dinner Nancy Reagan apocryphally asked what this man has done to be at a White House dinner, with this musician responding " I've changed the course of music five  or  six  times."  With  Gil  Evans,  this  musical  figure  created  arrangements  for  the  George Gershwin opera, Porgy and Bess. The Birth of the Cool and Kind of Blue were albums by, for ten points, which American Jazz trumpeter of the work Miles Ahead?	ANSWER: Miles Davis  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 2
Athenian  tyrant  Perillos  died  in  this  specific  manner  using  an  apparatus  called  the "Brazen  Bull,"  which  he  supposedly  invented.  Buddhist  monk  Thích  Quảng Đức  [[THICK KWAN  DOOK]]  performed  this  action  on  himself  to  protest  the  persecution  of  his  fellow monks in South Vietnam. Hammurabi decreed arsonists should be executed via this method in his namesake "Code." Christian heretics were most often executed by, for ten points, what method also known as immolation?	ANSWER: Burning (accept equivalents like being set on fire[a]; accept more specific examples like [a]burning at the stake; accept immolation or self-immolation before mentioned)
To create votives of this substance, the Ancient Greeks used the Sphyrelaton, or the "Hammer Elongated" method. Despite being known as the "Iron Man of India," Vallabhbhai Patel is depicted using this substance in the tallest statue on Earth, the Statue of Unity. Rodin [[roh-DAHN]] faced false accusations that he used a real person as the mold for his lifelike sculpture, The Age of [this metal]. The Little Mermaid in Copenhagen and The Thinker are cast in, for ten points, which historically valued metal alloy composed of Copper and Tin?	ANSWER: Bronze (accept Age of Bronze)
The  lynching  of  Thomas  Shipp  and  Abram  Smith  in  this  state  motivated  Abel Meeropol to pen the song "Strange Fruit." The abduction and killing of Madge Oberholtzer by this  state's  Klan  leader,  D.C.  Stephenson,  led  to  a  sharp  decline  in  the  second  KKK's membership.   A   Republican   senator   representing   this   state   interrupted   the   two   non- consecutive terms of Grover Cleveland by winning the Election of 1888. Benjamin Harrison and his grandfather William Henry Harrison both governed, for ten points, which Midwestern state?	ANSWER: Indiana
When this group began to overrun the FANK, the U.S. initiated Operation Eagle Pull to evacuate personnel. This regime closed most schools as part of its campaign against the "New  People"  and  used  a  former  high  school  building  as  "Security  Prison  21."  This  party's government killed over a quarter of its country's population at sites known as "Killing Fields." For ten points, name this Communist party led by Pol Pot that controlled Cambodia in the late 1970s.	ANSWER: Khmer Rouge  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 2
Auguste Mariette led an effort to clear this monument of debris prior to a visit by the Emperor of Brazil, Pedro II. Historians discovered that several 18th dynasty rulers may have suffered from familial epilepsy due to the Dream Stele [[STEE-lee]] situated in front of this monument. A now debunked theory claimed this monument lost its nose to cannon fire from Napoleon's army during the Battle of the Pyramids. The Pharaoh Khafre is depicted with the body of a lion in, for ten points, which monumental statue in Giza?	ANSWER: Great Sphinx of Giza
This  man  was  deemed  a  "White  Jew"  in  an  editorial  in Das  Schwarze  Korps,  the  SS newspaper, after he was named "favorite" to head the Munich Faculty. With a set of scientists, including Walther Gerlach, this physicist was detained in England through Operation Epsilon to  determine  how  close  the  Nazis  were  to  creating  an  atomic  bomb.  Albert  Einstein nominated this scientist for a 1932 Nobel Prize in Physics he won for determining limits to predicting  physical  quantities  of  particles.  An  "Uncertainty  Principle"  is  named  for,  for  ten points, which "Father of Quantum Mechanics"?	ANSWER: Werner Heisenberg (or Werner Karl Heisenberg; accept Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle)   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 2
The  1580s  war  for  this  country’s  succession  included  the  Battle  of  Ponta  Delgada,  a  naval  battle nearly 1,000 miles west of this country. In 1419, this country claimed the island of Porto Santo, part of an archipelago that is now an autonomous region with capital Funchal. Madeira and the Azores are controlled by this country, where the Douro River empties into the Atlantic near Porto. A 1755 earthquake and fire devastated, for ten points, what country’s capital city of Lisbon?	ANSWER: Portugal
This man worked with the ambassador Michel Ange Bernard de Mangourit during his most famous venture, which began when he arrived aboard theEmbuscadein Charleston Harbor. This man attempted to  hire  theAnti-Georgeand  other  privateers  to  help  his  country  in  a  war  against  Spain  and  Britain,  a stance opposed by George Washington. For ten points, name this Frenchman whose namesake affair tested American neutrality.	ANSWER: Edmond-Charles Genˆet(accept CitizenGenˆet)
This  government  permitted  the  “red  seal  ships”  to  trade  with  Southeast  Asia.  This  government’s Bakumatsu period, which began after the Convention of Kanagawa was signed, reversed the sakoku-era policy of isolationism. Matthew Perry negotiated with this government, which ended with the restoration of  the  emperor  in  the  Meiji  era.  For  ten  points,  name  this  final  feudal  shogunate  of  Japan  which  was founded in 1600 by Ieyasu.	ANSWER: TokugawaShogunate (prompt on Japan)
This  organization  ran  an  espionage  training  program  whose  students  included  Ernst  Wollweber and  which  was  known  as  M  School.  A  1929  conflict  pitted  the  forces  of  Zhang  Xueliang  against  this organization. While serving as the leader of this organization, Mikhail Tukhachevsky faced an uprising of sailors in the Kronstadt Rebellion. Forces of this organization fought against neighboring Finland in the Winter War. For ten points, name this force that fought the White Army in the Russian Civil War.	ANSWER: Workers’ and Peasants’ RedArmy(prompt on descriptions of the Soviet/Russian army)
Louise Stanley led this department’s Bureau of Home Economics, which produced theAunt Sammy radio  program  from  1926  to  1944  and  the  first  ever  braille  cookbook.  Under  Abraham  Lincoln,  Isaac Newton was the first head of what would become this department. The SNAP aid program is administered by this department, which was led by former Iowa governor Tom Vilsack in the Obama administration. For ten points, name this Cabinet department that runs the Farm Service Agency.	ANSWER: United States Department of Agriculture(acceptUSDA) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
This man described and names a type of beauty contest where the judges rate based on how they think other people will rate. This man, who proposed that it may be economically productive to pay people to bury and dig up money, famously criticized the punitive measures found in the Treaty of Versailles in his bookThe Economic Consequences of the Peace. For ten points, name this author ofThe General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, an early 20th century British economist.	ANSWER: John Maynard Keynes
This battle was the site of an alleged last stand at La Belle Alliance where one unit declared “the Guard dies, it does not surrender.” The Lion’s Mound monument commemorating this battle overlooks the house of La Haye Sainte. The arrival of Gebhard von Blucher’s Prussians helped decide this battle, which  forced  its  losing  commander  into  exile  at  Saint  Helena.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1815  battle  in which Napoleon was defeated for the final time.	ANSWER: Battle ofWaterloo
In 1922 in this city, a mob of boys brawled with dock workers who were wearing straw hats two days before the traditional date on which they became unfashionable. The Straw Hat Riot took place in this city,  where  youths  living  in  dumbbell  tenements  were  photographed  in  Jacob  Riis’How the Other Half Lives. Young men, predominantly Irish, in this city who were unable to afford a $300 fee rioted during the Civil War. For ten points, name this city where a 1935 race riot killed three people in Harlem.	ANSWER: NewYorkCity (orNYC)
This man once offered 500 pounds for the purchase of the twelve-year-old girl Teresa Makri, a failed bid that led to his poem “Maid of Athens, ere we part.” After meeting his cousin at a ball, he compared her  to  “the  night  of  cloudless  climes  and  starry  skies”  in  another  poem.  This  man,  who  described  the travels of a disillusioned man inChilde Harold’s Pilgrimage, died in Missolonghi in 1824. “She Walks in Beauty” andDon Juan [JOO-un] were written by, for ten points, what English poet who died fighting in the Greek War of Independence?	ANSWER: Lord George Gordon Byron
The  British  worked  to  replace  this  material  with  cordite  in  the  19th  century.  One  of  the  earliest descriptions  of  this  substance  is  in  theWujing Zongyao,  an  11th  century  military  compendium.  The Mughals, Safavids, and Ottomans were known as the empires of this substance, which is made of sulfur, charcoal, and saltpeter. For ten points, name this one of the Four Great Inventions of China, an explosive material that revolutionized ranged warfare.	ANSWER: gunpowder Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
A  thinker  from  this  country  founded  structural  anthropology  with  works  likeThe Elementary Structures of Kinship. Another thinker from this country founded a “religion of humanity” and formulated a “law of three stages,” espousing philosophical positivism.The Elementary Structures of Religious Life was  written  by  a  sociologist  from  this  country  who  pioneered  the  field  with  a  work  examining  suicide. For ten points, name this home country of the thinkers Auguste Comte, Claude Levi-Strauss, and ́ Emile [ay-MEEL] Durkheim.	ANSWER:France
This  man  recruited  Cord  Meyer  during  a  mission  to  manipulate  the  news  media  in  Operation Mockingbird, and he assigned Sidney Gottlieb to experiment with the possibility of mind control in the MK-ULTRA  project.  When  Mohammed  Mossadegh  nationalized  the  oil  industry,  this  man  launched Operation  Ajax  to  place  Mohammad  Shah  Pahlavi  in  power  in  Iran.  This  man  earned  the  displeasure of President Kennedy after planning the botched Bay of Pigs invasion. For ten points, name the longest serving head of the CIA, the brother of John Foster.	ANSWER: AllenDulles(prompt on Dulles)
This event led to the formation of the Dewey Commission, which exonerated one of its victims. Other victims  of  this  event  were  accused  of  assassinating  Sergey  Kirov  and  included  the  right-wing  Nikolai Bukharin. A photo was changed after this event to exclude Nikolai Yezhov, who was responsible for the worst actions of this event. The NKVD carried out most of the executions during this event, which aimed to get rid of the supporters of Leon Trotsky. For ten points, name this cleansing of the Soviet government just prior to World War II.	ANSWER: GreatPurge(prompt  on  descriptions  related  to  “Moscow  show  trials”  until  Yezhov  is mentioned)
A scholar who lived in this city wroteThe True Intellectual System of the Universeand was a rival of Thomas Hobbes; that man was Ralph Cudworth. This city names a group of Platonist 17th-Century philosophers and a group that included Anthony Blunt and Kim Philby, a spy ring known as this city’s namesake “five.” Isaac Newton attended Trinity College in, for ten points, what British city whose historic university is a rival of Oxford?	ANSWER: Cambridge
Amphibious landings near this city were a key part of Exercise Zapad-81, the USSR’s largest military exercise.  In  January  2019,  this  city’s  progressive  mayor,  Pawel  Adamowicz[pav-eladam-oh-vitz],  was stabbed and killed. Shipyard workers in this city chanted “Bring Anna Walentynowicz [vah-went-ee-no-vitz] Back to Work!” in 1980 during a strike at the Lenin Shipyard. The Solidarity movement began in, for ten points, what Polish port city?	ANSWER:Gdansk(acceptDanzig) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 2
In this decade, the Lafollette Commission revealed that the Pinkertons had spies in “practically every union in the country.” John Lewis negotiated the recognition of the UAW by General Motors after the Flint  sit-down  strike  in  this  decade.  Yellow  Dog  contracts  were  outlawed  in  this  decade,  in  which  the Wagner Act codified the right to unionize. The CCC planted trees to ameliorate the Dust Bowl in, for ten points, what decade in which Franklin Roosevelt introduced the New Deal?	ANSWER: 1930s (prompt on “thirties”)
A  theory  about  this  man  claims  that  he  was  shot  while  boarding  the  boat  of  Jakob  Lidl.  An unfavorable report from Bernhard von Gudden led Prince Luitpold to depose this man, who was found dead  in  Lake  Starnberg  after  a  possible  failed  attempt  to  escape  captivity  at  Berg  Castle.  This  ruler’s palace  was  located  above  Hohenschwangau[ho-hen-shvan-gow]  and  inspired  the  Sleeping  Beauty  castle. For ten points, name this king of Bavaria who constructed Neuschwanstein [noysh-van-stein], known as the “Mad King.”	ANSWER:LudwigII of Bavaria (accept Mad KingLudwig)
Peter Greyson partially destroyed a copy of one of these documents by pouring red paint mixed with glue on it. The 7/50 formula concerns changes to one of these documents in Canada. The Indian version of this document is the longest in the world, and the American version includes a Revenue Clause, noting that  spending  bills  begin  in  the  House  of  Representatives.  The  Articles  of  Confederation  were  replaced with, for ten points, what type of governing law?	ANSWER: constitution(accept additional information, like Canada’sConstitution)
These people were the target of a seawall built by Pompeo Targone, which withstood an assault from Henri de Rohan. A leader of these people, Gaspard de Coligny, was killed on the orders of Catherine de Medici during the St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre. These followers of John Calvin were stripped of their religious  tolerance  by  the  Edict  of  Fontainebleau,  many  years  after  it  was  first  granted  by  Henry  IV’s Edict of Nantes. For ten points, name this group of French Protestants.	ANSWER: Huguenots  (prompt  on  descriptions  of  French  Protestants/Calvinists  and  partial  answers thereof)
Negotiations for this treaty occurred concurrently with those of the Treaty of Hubertusburg. Charles III’s refusal to cede Cuba led to Spain relinquishing Florida as part of this agreement, which was largely negotiated by the Duc de Choiseul. In this treaty, Guadalupe and Martinique were kept by a party that ceded all of its mainland holdings west of the Mississippi River. Much of New France was ceded to England in, for ten points, what treaty ending the Seven Years’ War?	ANSWER: 1763 Treaty of Paris Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 2
Emperor Wu Di of Han placed a monopoly on salt and this material. A pillar of this material was signed by King Chandra and notoriously resists corrosion. The Hittites created artifacts of this material. Abraham Darby created a method to create the “pig” type of this substance using coke instead of charcoal. and its “wrought” form was used to construct the Eiffel Tower. For ten points, name this metal whose use ended the Bronze Age.	ANSWER: iron
During Europe’s industrial era, the most popular history of this country was an account by botanist Engelbert Kaempfer. The 26 martyrs were crucified in this country. After theSan Felipewas shipwrecked near this country, its leader closed off most of its ports to Spanish and Portuguese missionaries and forced its  Christian  population  to  become  Kakure [ka-koo-ray],  or  hidden.  For  ten  points,  name  this  country where Christianity once flourished around Nagasaki.	ANSWER: Japan
William  Thomas  Turner  attempted  to  prevent  this  disaster,  which  occurred  near  the  Old  Head  of Kinsale. The Cunard Company was prosecuted for its negligence surrounding this event, since it failed to reveal that munitions had been placed in storage. William Jennings Bryan resigned as Secretary of State because he felt Woodrow Wilson was too strong-handed in his reaction to, for ten points, what 1915 event in which a British ocean liner was torpedoed by a German U-boat?	ANSWER: sinkingof (orattackon, etc.) the RMSLusitania
Charles  Weir  invented  a  device  that  uses  this  mineral  to  compress  materials  to  extremely  high pressures. This mineral is the ideal crystal for ATR infrared spectroscopy. These minerals are often found in kimberlite pipes, which are named for a town in South Africa. For ten points, name this allotrope of carbon, a mineral created under extremely high temperatures and pressure that defines the value of 10 on Mohs’ scale of hardness.	ANSWER: diamonds
During this period, accused parties were ordered to prove their innocence by the Law of 22 Prairial, which strengthened the Law of Suspects. This period came to an end when the Battle of Fleurus helped trigger the Thermidorian Reaction against one of this period’s leaders. The Committee of Public Safety took control during this period, which ended with Maximilien Robespierre’s own execution. For ten points, name this year-long phase of the French Revolution in many political enemies were guillotined.	ANSWER: ReignofTerror(orTheTerroror LaTerreur; prompt on the French Revolution) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
Prior  to  defecting  to  the  Confederacy,  Franklin  Buchanan  was  the  first  superintendent  of  this institution’s  academy.  George  Bancroft  founded  the  training  center  for  this  military  force.  Two  rival members of this force dueled in 1820, with James Barron killing Stephen Decatur. Another early leader of this force, John Paul Jones, led theBon Homme Richardwhen he declared “I have not yet begun to fight!” For ten points, name this military force whose academy is based in Annapolis, Maryland on the Chesapeake Bay.	ANSWER: USNavy(accept word forms and elaborations likeUSNavalAcademy; prompt on “navy” alone; do not accept or prompt other terms, like “armed forces”)
The Scottish financier John Law advertised land claims along this river, triggering a bubble named after  this  river  in  the  French  court.  A  Native  American  culture  named  for  this  river  constructed  the mounds  at  Cahokia.  Robert  de  La  Salle  claimed  the  entirety  of  this  river’s  basin  for  France,  and  its northern reaches were explored by Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet. The French territory of Louisiana was centered around, for ten points, what river that empties into the Gulf of Mexico near New Orleans?	ANSWER: MississippiRiver
In the originally planned climax ofMen in Black II, these structures were to release a swarm of UFOs. A helicopter is caught in a web between these structures in an original trailer for the first Tobey Maguire Spidermanfilm. The 2008 filmMan on Wiredocuments Philippe Petit’s illegal 1974 walk between these structures  on  a  high-wire.  Several  early  21st  century  films  edited  out,  for  ten  points,  what  Manhattan buildings that were attacked on September 11th?	ANSWER:WorldTradeCenter1 and/or 2 (acceptTwinTowersand other descriptive answers of the two tallest bulidings in the WTCcomplex)
The first site to establish this industry in the U.S. was the Beverly Manufactory. A man nicknamed “the  traitor”  memorized  the  designs  of  British  equipment  used  in  this  industry  and  recreated  it  in  the U.S.;  that  man  was  Samuel  Slater.  The  Waltham-Lowell  system  placed  young  girls  in  this  industry  in boardinghouses  in  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island.  The  product  of  Eli  Whitney’s  gin  was  used  in,  for ten points, what industry that converted cotton into shirts and pants?	ANSWER: textileindustry  (acceptclothing  industry  orgarmentindustry;  acceptcottonindustry before read)
Hugh Trenchard is nicknamed the “father of” this military force, which sustained heavy casualties in  Bloody  April  during  the  Battle  of  Arras.  The  efforts  of  this  military  force  prompted  the  declaration “Never was so much owed by so many to so few.” This force employed the Sopwith Camel during World War I and the Supermarine Spitfire during World War II. For ten points, name this military force that battled the Luftwaffe to defend cities like Coventry and London.	ANSWER: RoyalAirForce(orRAF;  acceptRoyalFlyingCorps;  accept  descriptions  of  theair forceof theUnitedKingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, orBritishAirForce, or similar; prompt on partial answers; do not prompt on British Army) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
When this man was caught in a lie about Secretary of Agriculture Clinton Anderson’s findings about sugar supplies, he noted that he “didn’t give a tinker’s damn” about what Anderson had really said. The Tydings  Committee  investigated  this  man’s  claim,  made  in  a  Lincoln  Day  speech  in  Wheeling,  that  he held a list of 205 names of State Department members with questionable loyalties. For ten points, name this Wisconsin senator known for hunting communists during the Red Scare.	ANSWER: Joseph McCarthy
Sopwith Camels were equipped with two of these devices, often produced by Lewis. The capture of Roland Garros’ equipment helped German engineers like Anthony Fokker develop synchronization gear, permitting these closed-bolt weapons to operate through the gaps of a spinning propeller. The Browning M1919 replaced many Vickers-produced examples of, for ten points, what weapons that were mounted on World War I-era aircraft and could fire hundreds of bullets per minute?	ANSWER: machinegun(prompt on (automatic) gun or similar general terms; accept elaborations like “machineguns mounted on WW1-era planes”)
In  this  country,  Plinio  Salgado  founded  the  fascist  Integralist  party  which  was  disbanded  with  all other political parties in 1937. That move came after the announcement of the Cohen Plan, a supposed Communist  plot  whose  discovery  allowed  its  President  to  take  dictatorial  power.  That  leader,  Getulio Vargas, modernized this country’s economy as part of the Estado Novo. For ten points, name this South American country whose Old Republic was dominated by an oligarchy in S ̃ao Paulo.	ANSWER: Brazil
In a novel, Nicholas Branch is tasked with assembling information about this event, discovering the crippling dyslexia of the perpetrator. Permutations of this event are overseen by the Yellow Card Man in a 2011 Stephen King novel titled for the date of this event. This event, the subject ofLibraand11/22/63, was carried out from a school book depository in Dallas. For ten points, name this Presidential murder carried out by Lee Harvey Oswald.	ANSWER: assassinationofJohn FitzgeraldKennedy(orassassinationofJFK; prompt on partial answers)
In 2009, Karen Starko claimed that this event was exacerbated by the Surgeon General’s instruction to take aspirin. Woodrow Wilson nearly died in this event, which was first reported in the United States at Camp Funston in Fort Riley, Kansas. This event, which killed about five percent of the world’s population, was  spread  across  the  globe  by  soldiers  near  the  end  of  World  War  I.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1918 pandemic, commonly named for an Iberian country that didn’t censor the high death toll.	ANSWER: Spanishflupandemic  (accept1918flubefore  mentioned;  prompt  on  H1N1  flu,  flu,  or influenza alone) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
After helping a Senator from this party pay back improper residency expenses, Chief of Staff Nigel Wright resigned his post in 2013. Another member of this party suggested introducing a “barbaric cultural practices tip line;” that politician, Kellie Leitch, is running for this party’s May 2017 leadership elections. Rona Ambrose is the current interim leader of this party after the October 2015 resignation of Stephen Harper.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Canadian  political  party  that  was  removed  from  power  by  Justin Trudeau’s Liberals.	ANSWER: ConservativeParty of Canada
A portrait of a man from this city shows him holding his chin in one hand and a teapot he is working on in another. The subject of that work created an engraving addressed to “Unhappy [this city],” showing 5  bleeding  men  on  King  Street,  including  Crispus  Attucks.  John  Singleton  Copley  worked  in  this  city when  he  painted  Paul  Revere  and  Samuel  Adams.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Massachusetts  city  where British soldiers killed 5 American colonists in a 1770 “Massacre.”	ANSWER: Boston
Examples of this instrument include the Galician gaita and Italian zampogna, and George Buchanan claimed they were used instead of trumpets during battle starting in the mid-16th century. Contrary to legend, this musical instrument was not actually banned by the Proscription Act of 1746. The uilleann [ill-yin]  variety  of  this  instrument  makes  sound  through  drones  and  an  unusually  wide-ranging  chanter and is popular in Ireland. A goatskin sac is used to store air in, for ten points, what instrument whose Great Highland variety is from Scotland?	ANSWER:bagpipes
Legislation to undertake this project was introduced to Congress by Zadock Pratt. Thomas Durant helped  finance  this  project,  though  scandal  arose  when  Credit  Mobilier  attempted  to  overcharge  a company for its construction. This project was completed when Leland Stanford drove in the golden spike at Promontory, linking the Union Pacific and Central Pacific lines. For ten points, name this man-made transportation route that connected the Western and Eastern United States.	ANSWER: TranscontinentalRailroad
One  king  of  this  name  was  opposed  by  Simon  de  Montfort  and  forced  to  sign  the  Provisions  of Oxford,  the  first  written  constitution  of  his  country.  Another  king  of  this  name  signed  the  Treaty  of Wallingford to secure power and established the Plantagenet dynasty. The most famous king of this name fathered  Elizabeth  I  and  divorced  Anne  Boleyn  in  his  search  for  a  male  heir.  For  ten  points,  give  this name, held by eight English kings, the last of which had six wives.	ANSWER: Henry(acceptHenry3, 2, and/or 8) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
In  this  city,  Ezra  Pound  and  Igor  Stravinsky  are  buried  on  the  island  of  San  Michele.   Operation Bowler targeted this city’s harbor with a precision air strike.  One traveler from this city was imprisoned in  Genoa,  where  Rustichello  da  Pisa  recorded  his  stories  inIl Milione.   The  admirer  of  the  Polish  boy Tadzio,  Gustav von Aschenbach,  dies in this city in a 1912 novella by Thomas Mann.  Marco Polo was from, for ten points, what Italian city, famous for its canals?	ANSWER: Venice
Sigmund Rascher’s experiments were used to test technology for this military force.  Members of this group  carried  out  the  Stalag  Luft  III  murders  after  a  group  of  Allied  POWs  escaped  from  one  of  their prisons.  Its leader committed suicide after being sentenced to death during the Nuremberg Trials.  The Junkers [yoon-kers] Ju-87 was heavily used by this organization for dive-bombing.  Herman Goering led, for ten points, what branch of the Nazi military that bombed Britain?	ANSWER: Luftwaffe(accept the (Nazi)GermanAirForce)
This individual earned a “production E” in a song by Redd Evans and John Jacob Loeb.  This figure inspired  a  National  Historical  Park  in  Richmond,  California  that  is  home  to  the  SSRed  Oak  Victory. Geraldine  Doyle  was  the  inspiration  for  one  depiction  of  this  character  by  Westinghouse  employee  J. Howard Miller, which depicts her with a red bandana and flexed bicep, saying “We Can Do It!” for ten points, name this icon that encouraged American women to take factory jobs during World War II.	ANSWER: RosietheRiveter
An  1864  conference  in  this  city  created  72  proposed  resolutions  that  formed  its  country’s  first constitution;  that  conference  followed  one  in  Charlottetown.   The  former  Iroquois  village  of  Stadacona is  in  this  modern  city,  which  was  founded  by  Samuel  de  Champlain  in  1608.   The  Battle  of  the  Plains of Abraham was fought in what is now, for ten points, what namesake capital city of a French-speaking Canadian province?	ANSWER: QuebecCity
Shortly after performing this action, one athlete, born Chris Jackson, was suspended by the NBA after refusing to stand for “The Star-Spangled Banner.” The New York State Athletic Commission suspended one athlete for draft evasion, which that athlete justified on grounds of having performed this action.  A Milwaukee  Buck  and  future  Laker  changed  his  name  from  Lew  Alcindor  several  years  after  performing this action, which includes reciting the shahada.  For ten points, name this religious action performed by star athletes Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Muhammad Ali.	ANSWER: converting toIslam(orbecom(e)ing aMuslimor equivalents) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 2
The Russian Empire used Agvan Dorzhiev as a contact to one of these people.  One of these people fled  in  response  to  a  military  expedition  led  by  Francis  Younghusband,  and  his  successor  called  for  a democratic  “zone  of  peace”  in  his  Strasbourg  proposal.   These  people  are  said  to  be  reincarnations  of Avalokitesvara,  and  the  most  recent  of  these  people  went  to  exile  in  India  after  a  1959  uprising  was crushed by Chinese forces.  For ten points, name this position currently held by Tenzin Gyatso, the leader of Tibetan Buddhism.	ANSWER: DalaiLamas
This  man  added  anAndante  spinantoto  the  beginning  of  one  of  his  compositions.    The  third movement of his B-flat minor second piano sonata is a funeral march.  The revolutions of 1848 inspired this composer’s lover George Sand to nickname one of his works “Heroic,” and he was inspired by a dog chasing its tail to write a piece that is actually ninety seconds long.  For ten points, what piano virtuoso wrote theMinute Waltzand several polonaises inspired by his native Poland?	ANSWER: Fr ́ed ́eric Fran ̧cois Chopin(or Fryderyk FranciszekChopin)
According to its invocation, this ruling was “sincerely believed to be an act of justice warranted by the Constitution.” This ruling came with one hundred days’ notice and specifically exempted New Orleans and the land that was to become West Virginia.  The victory at Antietam led to its issuing, which only immediately took effect in territory controlled by Union forces.  For ten points, name this executive order issued on January 1, 1863 by President Lincoln, which freed over three million slaves in the South.	ANSWER: EmancipationProclamation
One protest in this country used the slogans “Be Realists:  Demand the Impossible!” and “Alcohol Kills;  Take  LSD”  and  was  led  by  Daniel  Cohn-Bendit.   This  country’s  riot  police,  the  CRS,  violently put down that protest,  which had been removed from an administrative building at Nanterre.  Georges Pompidou was initially unable to control May 1968 riots at the Sorbonne in, for ten points, what country, that reacted two months later by re-electing Charles de Gaulle?	ANSWER: France
This man appointed Edward Douglass White as Chief Justice.  He used the “Saxbe fix” to appoint Philander  Knox,  who  carried  out  a  program  of  promoting  corporate  interests  in  foreign  countries,  or “dollar  diplomacy.”  In  his  re-election  campaign,  he  only  won  Utah  and  Vermont,  partially  because  his predecessor split from the Republican Party to run on the Bull Moose ticket.  For ten points, name this President who succeeded Theodore Roosevelt, then served as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.	ANSWER: William Howard Taft
Court  painter  Daniel  Maclise  depicted  this  monarch  meeting  a  noblewoman At Hampton  Court in  one  painting.  This  monarch  appears  on  the  bottom  left  approaching  the royal party of Francis I in the landscape painting Field of the Cloth of Gold. This man employed foreigner Hans Holbein the Younger, who depicted this king in a portrait situated next to one of  Jane  Seymour  and  this man's  father  Henry VII  [[the  Seventh]].  For  ten  points,  name  this English king who is depicted in several portraits with his six wives.	ANSWER: Henry VIII [[the Eighth]]
Secretary of War Jefferson Davis sent this man to Europe to study the tactics of the Crimean War, and later in his life, he would serve as governor of New Jersey. In letters to his wife, this general describes himself as "the power of the land" and the commander in chief as a "well meaning baboon." This general was removed from command following the Battle of Antietam, and would challenge President Lincoln in the Election of 1864. For ten points, name this prideful Union general, known for his cautiousness in battle.	ANSWER: George B. McClellan (prompt on "Little Mac" or "Young Napoleon")
A  member  of  this  family  wrote  the  book On  the  Art  of  the  Cinema and  ordered  the kidnapping  of  film  director  Shin  Sang-ok.  Members  of  this  family  promote  the  ideology  of "military first" or "Songun" and a quasi-religion called "Juche" [[JOO-cheh]]. A member of this family met with Dennis Rodman in 2013 and was rumored to be transferring power to his sister Yo-jong due to health issues in 2020. Dictators Il-sung, Jong-il, and Jong-un belong to, for ten points, what family that controls North Korea?	ANSWER: Kim family (accept Kim Il-sung; Kim Jong-il; or Kim Jong-un)
In a failed attempt to prevent this event, a route along Appel Quay was decided upon by  Oskar  Potiorek.  A  false  turn  by  Leopold  Lojka  [[LOY-kuh]]  resulted  in  this  event,  which was preceded by a failed attack with a hand grenade. An FN Model 1910 was used to carry out this attack, which also resulted in the death of its central target’s wife, Sophie. The Black Hand helped organize this event, which was perpetrated by the Bosnian Serb Gavrilo Princip. For ten points, name this 1914 attack that killed the heir presumptive of Austria-Hungary.	ANSWER: Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand (accept clear-knowledge equivalents for "assassination"; prompt on partial answer)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 3
In the 1970s, this man was nominated for Best Recording for Children at the Grammys for an educational album featuring [this man] and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay. Jimmy Carter tasked this athlete with a 1980 tour of Africa to endorse the boycott of the Moscow Olympics. In an effort to legitimize his regime, dictator Mobutu Sese Seko hosted a contest between this athlete and George Foreman, the so-called "Rumble in the Jungle." Cassius Clay was once the name of, for ten points, which boxer, known as "The Greatest"?	ANSWER: Muhammad Ali (accept Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. before mentioned)
The Moro of Mindanao declared one of these specific conflicts after the government of  Ferdinand  Marcos  killed  many  of  its  acolytes  in  the  Corregidor  massacre.  During  one  of these  specific  conflicts,  scholar  Usman  dan  Fodio  united  many  of  the  Hausa  independent states  after  being  appointed  "Commander  of  the  Faithful."  Ottoman  sultan  Mehmed  V formally declared a "Great" one of these religious wars against the Allies during World War One.  For  ten  points,  name  these  Islamic  holy  wars,  often  considered  a  counterpart  to  a Christian "Crusade."	ANSWER: Jihad (prompt on answers involving "Religious warfare")
Civil  War  general  Benjamin  Butler  was  given  the  nickname “Spoons” for taking silverware from a woman during the Union’s occupation of this city, the most populous in the Confederacy.  In  another  conflict,  Edward  Pakenham  was  defeated  in  this  city  by  a  force assisted by pirate Jean Lafitte [[lah-FEET]] in a battle fought after the signing of the Treaty of Ghent. Andrew Jackson won the Battle of, for ten points, what city major port city annexed into the Union by the Louisiana Purchase?	ANSWER: New Orleans (accept La Nouvelle-Orléans; or NOLA)
This prime minister ordered British forces to bombard Alexandria in response to the 'Urabi [[oo-RAH-bee]] revolt. The Hawarden [[HAR-den]] Kite was an infamous news scoop that  suggested  this  man  supported  Irish  Home  Rule.  This  leader  attacked  a  prominent political rival over their response to the “Bulgarian Horrors” in his Midlothian campaign. For ten points, name this four-time Liberal British prime minister during the nineteenth century and rival of Benjamin Disraeli.	ANSWER: William Ewart Gladstone
During  this  war, one  participant  revoked  their  ambassador  in  Sweden  for  openly harboring  deserters.  Mark  Satin  wrote a  "Manual" which  taught men  how  to  integrate into Canadian society during this war, and Arlo Guthrie recounts traveling to Whitehall Street in New  York  and intentionally  acting  mentally  ill  in  the  protest  song  "Alice's  Restaurant Massacree."  Men  like  Bill  Clinton  and  Dick  Cheney  faced  accusations  of  dodging,  for  ten points, what 1960s and 1970s conflict in Southeast Asia?	ANSWER: Vietnam War (accept Second Indochina War)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 3
This figure incorporated a band he managed, Lou Reed's Velvet Underground, into his multimedia art show, the Exploding Plastic Inevitable. This man was shot after the author of the  radical  feminist  work,  the SCUM  Manifesto,  Valerie  Solanas,  claimed  he  had  too  much control  over  her  life.  Silkscreen  ink  was  used  by  this  artist  to  depict  the  preeminent Communist  leader  Mao  Zedong. 32  Campbell's  Soup  Cans and  the Marilyn  Diptych were created by, for ten points, which American Pop artist?	ANSWER: Andy Warhol (or Andrew Warhola, Jr.)   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 3
In  2017,  this  state’s  town  of  Cleveland  settled  a  52-year-long  court  case  about  the  segregation of  its  public  schools.  This  state  passed  a  law  banning  felons  from  college  admission,  then  charged  a black applicant with false voter registration and convicted himin absentiaon the same day. Ultimately, Robert F. Kennedy ordered U.S. Marshals to desegregate this state’s flagship university on the request of Governor Ross Barnett, who refused to do it without being coerced. For ten points, name this US state where James Meredith attended college in Oxford.	ANSWER: Mississippi
One side in this war benefited from trees planted as target markers years prior by a spy in the Ministry of Defense. The losing side in this war renewed its commitment to “no peace” and “no negotiation” in the Khartoum Resolution. This war began with Operation Focus, a surprise attack that crippled the losing side’s  air  force,  contributing  to  that  side’s  loss  of  the  Sinai  Peninsula  and  the  Golan  Heights.  For  ten points, name this 1967 war, a quick victory for Israel over an Arab coalition.	ANSWER: Six-DayWar  (acceptThirdArab-IsraeliWar;  accept1967Arab-IsraeliWar  before “1967” is read)
Members  of  this  group  collaborated  on  an  unfinished  opera-ballet  about  the  Polabian  Slavs  in  the 10th century titledMlada. An 1185 campaign against the Cumans and their Khans is the subject of an opera  from  this  group  that  features  the  Polovtsian  Dances;  another  work  from  this  group  is  about  the fall of the Rurikids. The composers ofPrince IgorandBoris Godunov, Alexander Borodin and Modest Mussorgsky, were members of, for ten points, what nationalist movement in 19th century Russian music?	ANSWER: The MightyHandful(accept the MightyFive; accept Moguchayakuchka)
This man recognized the authority of Philip Augustus over Angevin lands in the Treaty of Le Goulet, but later tried to challenge those claims in the disastrous Battle of Bouvines [boo-veen]. This man was excommunicated  by  Innocent  III  after  refusing  to  allow  Stephen  Langton  be  appointed  Archbishop  of Canterbury. This king was cornered at Runnymede by discontented barons, forcing this man to curb his own power to tax and promise trials by jury. For ten points, name this English king who signed the Magna Carta.	ANSWER: King John(acceptJohnI; acceptJohnLackland)
This politician was accused of taking bribes from the Union Pacific Railroad in the Mulligan Letters. This politician was endorsed in a speech by Robert Ingersoll, leading to him being nicknamed the “Plumed Knight.” This politician lost the support of many Catholics when a pastor denounced Democrats as the party of “Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion”. For ten points, name this senator and so-called “Continental Liar” from Maine who was defeated by Grover Cleveland in the election of 1884.	ANSWER: James G. Blaine Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 3
This author described his annoyance with police calling him “Joe” in his autobiographical memoir Joseph Anton,  named  for  his  pseudonym.  A  novel  by  this  author  depicts  Muhammad’s  early  followers alongside stories about Jibreel Farishta and Saladin Chamcha. 2019’sQuichottewas written by, for ten points, what British-Indian novelist who became the subject of a fatwa from Ayatollah Khomeini for his novelThe Satanic Verses?	ANSWER: Salman Rushdie
A king of this location was believed to have invented the chariot to hide his serpentine feet. Ericthonius ruled  this  location,  as  did  another  serpent-legged  king  named  Cecrops,  who  judged  an  olive  tree  to  be better than a salt water spring. Another king of this city died when his son returned with black sails on his boat after slaying the Minotaur. The mythological figures Theseus and Aegeus ruled, for ten points, what ancient Greek city whose origin myth includes Poseidon losing a contest to be its namesake?	ANSWER:Athens(acceptAtticabefore “city” is read)
Participants in this event were captured at Arthur Allen’s home, which became known as its leader’s “Castle.” This event was sparked by a Doeg raid on the farm of Thomas Matthews. The namesake of this event issued a Declaration of the People and massacred the Occoneechee people. John Ingram replaced the leader of this event after he died of dysentery. Governor William Berkley hung 23 men for participation in, for ten points, what 1676 rebellion that led to the burning of Jamestown?	ANSWER: Bacon’sRebellion
This man’s namesake stand was a cast iron base used to keep his subject still. This man, who depicted an  elderly  Andrew  Jackson  at  his  estate  and  created  portraits  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe,  used  the  albumen print technique after originally working with daguerreotypes. Ulysses S. Grant places his hand on a tree in a work by, for ten points, what artist whose exhibitionThe Dead of Antietamdisplayed the gruesome nature of the Civil War via photography?	ANSWER: Mathew Brady
This man signaled his newfound status by changing his last name to include “Novyi.” Enemies of this man accused him of joining the Khlysty sect. This man was lured into the Moika Palace on the night of his downfall, and when he drank Felix Yusupov’s cyanide-laced wine without any effect, he was shot three times. This man had gained royal influence due to his apparent ability to stop the bleeding of Alexei, the hemophiliac heir of the tsar. For ten points, name this Russian mystic who advised Nicholas II.	ANSWER: GrigoriRasputin Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 3
During  this  campaign,  the  city  of  Camarina  declared  its  neutrality  but  secretly  sent  arms  to Hermocrates.  A  war  between  the  cities  of  Selinus  and  Segesta  was  used  as  pretext  for  this  campaign, which ominously began with the destruction of sacred hermai statues; that crime was falsely blamed on Alcibiades, who then defected rather than face trial. For ten points, name this disastrous campaign of the Peloponnesian War in which an Athenian force was completely wiped out on a large Mediterranean island.	ANSWER: SicilianExpedition   (accept   descriptions   of   Athens’   invasion   ofSicily;   prompt   on Peloponnesian War before mentioned)
Description  acceptable.  Thomas  Graham  led  diplomatic  efforts  in  support  of  this  goal,  which  was discussed at the Pugwash Conferences. A 1968 treaty with 3 “pillars” sought this goal, which enjoyed a significant step forward with the INF treaty signed after the Reykjavik Summit. Treaties like SALT and START sought, for ten points, what peaceful goal regarding a certain type of dangerous weapon?	ANSWER: nucleardisarmamentor nuclearnonproliferation(accept anything related toreducing thenumberofnuclearweapons; prompt on arms control and other descriptions that don’t mention nuclear weapons)
This  god  burned  himself  to  death  after  he  slept  with  a  celibate  priestess  while  drunk.  This  god contributed his own blood to create the fifth world-cycle, and supposedly invented books and the calendar. This brother of Xolotl [sho-LOT-ull] was identified with Venus and, supposedly, also with the conquistador Hernan Cortes when he arrived in Mexico in 1519. For ten points, name this Aztec God who fought with Tezcatlipoca, a feathered serpent.	ANSWER:Quetzalcoatl
While serving on an expedition for Alonso de Ojeda, this man decided to split and sail southward, during  which  time  he  discovered  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon  River.  In  1508,  Ferdinand  II  of  Aragon commissioned  this  man  to  be  chief  navigator  of  Spain.  This  man  was  the  first  to  notice  that  the  New World was separate from Asia, inspiring Martin Waldseemuller to adopt his name for certain landmasses on a map. For ten points, name this explorer who lends his name to two continents.	ANSWER: Amerigo Vespucci
This man rose to his highest post after Milan Gorkic was assassinated by secret police. He emerged victorious in a power struggle with Draza Mihailovic’s Chetniks. This man was eventually expelled from Cominform  after  his  style  of  socialism  led  to  a  break  with  Joseph  Stalin,  so  he  instead  served  as  the European  leader  of  the  Non-Aligned  movement.  For  ten  points,  name  this  marshal  who  led  Yugoslavia following World War II.	ANSWER: Josip Broz Tito Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
The land for a colony in this modern-day state was possibly bought after thirteen coats were given to the Quinnipiack tribe by Theophilus Eaton and John Davenport. A university in this state was previously located  in  the  nearby  town  of  Saybrook;  that  Ivy  League  institution  formed  in  1701  amidst  clerical differences in the faculty at Harvard. For ten points, name this state, home to Yale University and the 1815 Hartford Convention.	ANSWER: Connecticut
Scenes of this people’s daily life and armed conflict are among subject matter of paintings found in the Fran ̧cois tomb. Cosimo de Medici bought a famous bronze statue of made by these people depicting a chimera. The prevalence of horse figurines in the Villanovan culture suggests their importance to these people, who lived in cities like Tarquinia and Veii. Present-day Umbria and Tuscany was home to, for ten points, what Italian people who fought a series of wars with ancient Rome?	ANSWER:Etruscans
A precursor to this object used by FDR was calledSacred Cow. Mark Tillman once controlled this object,  which  one  man  was  forced  to  use  after  giving  a  speech  at  an  elementary  school  in  Sarasota, Florida. Golden livery in this object was designed with the help of Jackie Kennedy, who was present when Lyndon Johnson was sworn in aboard it. John F. Kennedy’s body was taken to Washington D.C. on, for ten points, what aircraft that transports the President?	ANSWER: AirForceOne
Raising awareness of this disease was the goal of the VDRP, an American media campaign. It has been  theorized  that  Christopher  Columbus’s  crewmen  brought  this  disease  to  Europe  from  the  New World. The progression of this disease was studied in people with “bad blood” even after the discovery of penicillin, a suitable antibiotic for this disease. Researchers at the Tuskegee Institute carried out unethical experimentation  on  African  American  men  who  were  given,  for  ten  points,  what  sexually-transmitted disease?	ANSWER: syphilis
Concerns that she was too young for marriage may have prompted one member of this family to break  off  her  engagement  to  the  playwright  Royall  Tyler;  that  woman  from  this  family  was  nicknamed “Nabby.” Another member of this family served as minister to the Netherlands during the Washington administration, helping John Jay negotiate his namesake treaty. That man from this family traveled with his  father  on  a  diplomatic  journey  to  France  in  1778  and  was  born  in  Quincy,  Massachusetts.  For  ten points, name this early American family that included the second and sixth presidents.	ANSWER: Adamsfamily Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
This  man  built  a  gigantic  bridge  over  the  Bay  of  Baiae  to  prove  to  a  soothsayer  he  could  ride  a horse over the bay. This man’s predecssor was smothered by the Praetorian Prefect Macro. This emperor ordered  an  invasion  of  Britain  that  ended  with  his  men  collecting  sea  shells  instead.  Suetonius  claimed that this man planned to make his horse Incitatus consul. The nickname “Little Soldier’s Boot” was given to, for ten points, what insane Roman emperor?	ANSWER: Caligula(acceptGaiusCaesar;  acceptGaiusJuliusCaesarAugustusGermanicus; do not prompt on Caesar alone)
One  of  these  phenomena,  nicknamed  the  “mud-eater”  for  its  effects  on  Provence’s  agriculture,  is known as the mistral. William of Orange’s invasion of England was enabled by a so-called “Protestant” version of this phenomenon, which also destroyed Philip II’s Armada, preventing a Spanish takeover. The Portuguese used the term “volto de mar” to describe their caravels being powered by, for ten points, what meteorological phenomenon that powers sailing ships?	ANSWER: winds (accept close equivalents likestorm, but not “rain”; acceptmistralbefore mentioned; accept Protestantwindafter “William” is mentioned; accept tradewinds after “volto” is mentioned)
In  this  war,  a  group  of  German  mercenaries  under  French  leadership  called  Lauzun’s  Legion  saw action  at  White  Plains.  A  German  officer  in  this  war  ordered  the  establishment  of  separate  toilets  and kitchens  and  educated  troops  about  marching  orders  during  a  brutal  winter  encampment.  A  group  of Hessian  soldiers  in  this  war  were  defeated  in  a  surprise  attack  the  day  after  Christmas  in  the  Battle of  Trenton.  For  ten  points,  name  this  war  in  which  Baron  von  Steuben  drilled  troops  at  Valley  Forge, Pennsylvania, during the winter of 1777.	ANSWER: American RevolutionaryWar
A three-part collection by this author depicts conditions in a besieged city in December, May, and August.  The  second  part  of  an  epilogue  to  a  novel  by  this  author  attacks  the  Great  Man  theory  of history, arguing that the importance of heroic figures like Napoleon is overrated. This author ofSevastopol Sketcheswrote a novel about Pierre Bezuhkov set during the French invasion of Russia. For ten points, name this author ofWar and Peace.	ANSWER: Leo Nikolayevich Tolstoy
Debate over this action was triggered by a plan to give Lorenzo Thomas a job. Prominent advocates for this action included John Bingham and an ailing Thaddeus Stevens. Edmund Ross earned a chapter of John F. Kennedy’sProfiles  in  Couragefor casting the deciding vote against this action, which was a response to a violation of the Tenure of Office Act. The attempted firing of Edwin Stanton triggered, for ten points, what Congressional event that sought to remove Abraham Lincoln’s successor from office?	ANSWER: impeaching  AndrewJohnson(prompt  on  partial  answers,  such  as  “impeachment”  and answers related to “removing Andrew Johnson (from the Presidency)”) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
A symbol of authority possessed by the holder of this position was a set of nine cauldrons, or ding. A group of five legendary holders of this position are paired with the Three Sovereigns in many ancient texts, and the most prominent member of that group is usually named after the color yellow. The holder of  this  position  was  given  the  right  and  ability  to  rule  from  a  divine  provenance,  which  was  called  the Mandate of Heaven. For ten points, name this position held by monarchs from the Han Dynasty.	ANSWER: EmperorofChina(accept equivalents such askingofChinaorrulerofChina)
One of these objects designed by Robert Moses was partially built using wartime rubble from England. Andrew Jackson vetoed a bill that would have created one of these structures named for Maysville, which would have been part of the Cumberland System. After his positive experience with the Autobahn, Dwight Eisenhower ordered the construction of, for ten points, what type of transportation infrastructure whose American examples include I-95 and Route 66?	ANSWER:roads (accept specific answers, likehighways orturnpikes, etc.; accept FDRDrive; accept Maysville Road; accept CumberlandRoad; acceptInterstatesystem, InterstateHighwaysystem, etc.)
Emmanuel de Roug ́e coined the term for these people, who are depicted on the Medinet Habu temple. Fighting these people at the Battle of Djahy and the Battle of the Delta caused the depletion of Ramesses III’s treasury. The invasions of these people may have been caused by a famine in Anatolia, though they may  also  have  been  Philistines  or  Minoans  fleeing  a  volcanic  eruption.  The  Bronze  Age  Collapse  was caused by, for ten points, what invaders of the New Kingdom of Egypt that came from the Mediterranean?	ANSWER: SeaPeoples
This  piece’s  melody  was  also  used  for  “When  the  Warrior  Returns,”  which  celebrated  Stephen Decatur’s victory in the Barbary Wars. The opening of this song is used to represent Lieutenant Pinkerton in Giacomo Puccini’sMadame  Butterfly. The lyrics to this song were written aboard the HMSTonnant and set to the tune ofTo Anacreon in Heaven. For ten points, name this patriotic song written during the defense of Fort McHenry by Francis Scott Key.	ANSWER: The Star-SpangledBanner(prompt on descriptive answers relating to America’s national anthem; prompt on “To Anacreon in Heaven” before “Tonnant” is mentioned)
To prepare for this battle, the winning commander designed a namesake “chequer” of yellow and black lines to better identify his ships. A tactic mirroring John Jervis’ maneuvers at Cape St. Vincent was employed at this battle to isolate theBucentaure. The destruction of a Franco-Spanish navy at this battle ended  Napoleon’s  hopes  of  invading  England.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1805  victory  for  Lord  Nelson, commemorated in a namesake London Square.	ANSWER: Battle of Trafalgar Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
This author ofPostcards from the Edgewrote multiple autobiographical works that openly discuss her positive experience with electroconvulsive therapy as treatment for bipolar disorder. This author of the memoirThe Princess Diaristis, with her mother, the subject ofBright Lights, a documentary that premiered on HBO in January 2017, just weeks after their deaths. For ten points, name this mental health advocate, daughter of Debbie Reynolds, and actress who portrayed Princess Leia in theStar Warsfilms.	ANSWER: Carrie Fisher
Oscar L ́opez Rivera, an independence activist for this territory, had his prison sentence commuted during Barack Obama’s last week in office. In 2016, this territory was blocked from declaring bankruptcy by the Supreme Court. Like Guam and the Philippines, this commonwealth’s ownership transferred to the U.S. after the Spanish-American War. For ten points, name this Caribbean island territory where activists in its capital, San Juan, wish to become the 51st U.S. state.	ANSWER: PuertoRico
These people discovered a “land of stone slabs” that might be the Torngat Mountains. These people harvested lumber from Markland and recorded finding grapes in another area. These people battled against Skraelings and found grapes during their brief settlements in Vinland and at L’Anse Aux Meadows. The first European peoples to land in Canada were, for ten points, what Scandinavians, including the explorer Leif Ericsson?	ANSWER: Norsemen  (orVikings;  acceptDanes  orGreenlanders;  prompt  on  Scandinavians  before mentioned)
This group regularly held meetings at the Menger Hotel Bar of San Antonio. After the Battle of Las Guasimas, the doctor Leonard Wood ceased to be the leader of this group, which presented a president with  a  bronze  miniature  of  Remington’sBronco Buster.  In  their  most  famous  engagement,  this  group charged up the Kettle and San Juan Hills in Cuba. For ten points, name this volunteer cavalry unit that was led by Teddy Roosevelt during the Spanish American War.	ANSWER: RoughRiders(or  the1stUnited  StatesVolunteerCavalryRegiment,  prompting  on partial answers thereof)
This  composer  depicted  the  industrialization  of  the  Soviet  Union  in  his  balletThe Steel Stepand used music from his unperformed balletAla i Lollito write theScythian Suite. A work by this composer written for an audience of Young Pioneers uses the clarinet to represent a cat, and this composer included the “Dance of the Knights” in a Shakespearean ballet. For ten points, name this Soviet composer of the balletRomeo and JulietandPeter and the Wolf.	ANSWER: Sergei Sergeyevich Prokofiev Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 3
This man’s policy ran on the ideas of “peace at home, peace in the world,” though his troops almost prompted war with Great Britain in the Chanak crisis. After securing independence, this man was able to replace the Treaty of Sevres with the Treaty of Lausanne. As part of “Six Arrows” ideology, this leader banned the fez. Years after he won at Gallipoli, this leader established a new capital at Ankara. For ten points, name this founder of modern Turkey.	ANSWER: Mustafa KemalAtaturk(accept either underlined portion)
This man’s wounding at the Breymann redoubt is commemorated by the “Boot Monument” in New York.  This  man  was  forced  to  flee  on  theVultureafter  he  was  implicated  by  a  set  of  secret  plans  that were found with John Andre. After Horatio Gates took the credit for this man’s successes at the Battle of Saratoga, this man plotted to surrender West Point to the British. For ten points, name this treasonous American Revolutionary War general.	ANSWER: BenedictArnold
In the Cutter incident, vaccines of this virus were accidentally tainted with live virus. The inventor of the vaccine for this disease defended his decision to not patent it with the rebuttal “Could you patent the sun?” Wild cases of this disease in 2015 were reported only in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The “iron lung” was primarily used to assist sufferers of, for ten points, what viral disease whose vaccine was developed by Jonas Salk?	ANSWER: poliomyelitis
This  country  faced  a  round  of  protests  when  the  Cinema  Rex  fire  was  mistakenly  blamed  on government operatives. The Army of Knowledge was established in this country to improve literacy during the  White  Revolution,  which  was  supported  by  the  repression  of  the  SAVAK  police.  Shortly  after  the overthrow of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, this country fell under the grasp of the Ayatollah Khomeini. For ten points, name this country, the site of a 444-day-long hostage crisis in the American embassy in Tehran.	ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Iran
A Polish person of uncertain identity who held this profession is dubbed Gallus Anonymous. Aside from  being  a  monk,  a  resident  of  Kiev  named  Nestor  was  an  early  practitioner  of  this  profession.  The Byzantine  Procopius  held  this  profession,  producing  a  “Secret”  book  that  described  the  misdeeds  of Theodora and Justinian. Herodotus is called the father of, for ten points, what profession that involves chronicling the past?	ANSWER:historian(orchronicler; prompt on answers such as writer or scribe) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 3
John Cobb died while on a speedboat in this body of water.  The crannog of Cherry Island lies in this  body  of  water,  on  whose  shores  lie  Urquhart  Castle  and  the  town  of  Port  Augustus.   The  Falls  of Foyers  feed  into  this  body  of  water.   The  “Surgeon’s  Photograph”  was  a  hoax  purportedly  depicting  a creature that lived in this lake.  For ten points, name this Scottish body of water, purportedly home to a cryptocreature named Nessie.	ANSWER: LochNess(orLakeNess)
Albert Schweitzer won the 1952 Nobel Peace Prize in part for building one of these institutions in Lambar ́en ́e,  Gabon.   The  poor  conditions  in  one  of  these  buildings  in  Scutari  led  Isambard  Kingdom Brunel to build a prefabricated one of these that was shipped to Renkioi during the Crimean War.  One of these in Kunduz was attacked in 2015; that airstrike was requested by anti-Taliban forces and carried out by the US Air Force.  For ten points, name these institutions built in warzones by Doctors Without Borders.	ANSWER: hospital
This island’s native population, known for long, wavy beards, rebelled in Shakushain’s Revolt.  This island’s  port  of  Hakodate[hah-ko-dah-tay]  was  the  capital  of  its  breakway  Republic  of  Ezo.   The  first Asian Winter Olympics were held on this island at Sapporo.  The Seikan Tunnel connects this home of the Ainu people to its southern neighbor, Honshu.  The Sea of Okhtosk is north of, for ten points, what northernmost of Japan’s four main islands?	ANSWER: Hokkaido
Marty Glickman claimed that his removal from an Olympic team in favor of this man was a political capitulation  by  Avery  Brundage.   This  man  provided  the  “greatest  45  minutes  in  sports”  by  breaking three world records and tying another at a Big Ten conference meet.  This athlete controversially claimed that “it was our president who snubbed me” in response to having not shaken Adolf Hitler’s hand on the medal podium.  For ten points, name this African-American runner who won four gold medals at the 1936 Summer Olympics.	ANSWER: (James Cleveland) JesseOwens
Zia  ul-Haq  led  a  coup  against  one  leader  with  this  surname  in  Operation  Fair  Play.   That  leader with this surname was later arrested for the murder of Ahmed Kasuri and executed after a sham trial. That leader’s daughter was exiled on corruption charges for nine years before Pervez Musharraf granted her amnesty to run in 2007 elections; during that campaign, she was assassinated in Rawalpindi.  For ten points, give this surname shared by Zulfikar Ali and Benazir, two Prime Ministers of Pakistan.	ANSWER: Bhutto Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 3
Gary  Gordon  and  Randy  Shughart  were  killed  while  defending  one  of  these  vehicles  near  the Bakaara market.  A haboob prevented eight of these vehicles, nicknamed “Sea Stallions,” from successfully completing Operation Eagle Claw,  much to the embarrassment of Jimmy Carter.  During the Battle of Mogadishu, two of these vehicles were grounded by RPG fire.  The Sikorsky Black Hawk is, for ten points, what type of military aircraft, which uses rotary wings?	ANSWER: helicopter
After fighting at Sevastopol, this city was to be attacked by the Schwerer Gustav railgun.  An attack on this city was led by Ritter von Leeb and carried out during Operation Northern Light.  A supply route called  the  Road  of  Life  helped  resupply  this  city  by  ferrying  supplies  across  Lake  Lagoda.   During  the relief of this city, the Baltic fleet fired on troops from Army Group North after breaking 900 days of siege. For ten points, name this city, named for the first leader of the Soviet Union.	ANSWER:Leningrad(prompt on St.  Petersburg before mentioned; do not accept or prompt Petrograd)
This  man  called  one  of  his  works  a  “proper  Vehicle  for  conveying  Instruction  among  the  common People;” that work was published under the name Saunders.  He detailed his fleeing from Boston to New York and his writing of the Silence Dogood essays in an autobiography published in 1791.  The aphorism “early to bed, early to rise/makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise” is attributed to, for ten points, what author ofPoor Richard’s Almanac, an American founding father?	ANSWER: Ben Franklin
This  building  was  constructed  with  the  help  of  a  donation  from  the  governor  Zerubbabel.   This building, where a table always held a dozen loaves of “showbread,” was the cultural and religious center of the Hasmonean Kingdom, which gained its independence following the Maccabean Revolt.  This structure was destroyed on Tisha B’Av in 70 AD, and the Dome of the Rock was built on its former location.  The Western, or “Wailing,” Wall is the only remaining portion of, for ten points, what Jewish holy building?	ANSWER: SecondTempleof Jerusalem (prompt on Temple; do not accept Temple of Solomon)
Wisconsin’s John Blaine was the only senator to vote against ratification of this agreement, which the  Senate  interpreted  to  protect  the  right  to  self-defense.   Sixty-two  countries  ultimately  signed  this agreement, which was criticized for having no effective means of enforcement, as seen by Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia in 1935.  For ten points, name this 1928 agreement, named for a US Secretary of State and French Foreign Minister, whose signatories renounced the use of war in national policy.	ANSWER:Kellogg-BriandPact (acceptPactofParis)
A  boy  named  Chanco  saved  this  city  from  a  native  raid  by  warning  his  caregiver, Richard  Pace,  of  the  impending  attack.  In  the  opening  days  of  the  Civil  War,  William  Allen raised a private pro-Confederate militia to occupy this site to block the Union from reaching Richmond downstream. This city was partially razed in the midst of Bacon's Rebellion, and the  House  of  Burgesses  was  originally  set  up  in  this  settlement  prior  to  its  relocation  to Williamsburg. A Stuart king names, for ten points, which first permanent English settlement in North America?	ANSWER: Jamestown
All three daughters of one ruler of this name were accused of adultery in the Tour de Nesle  [NEH-luh]]  Affair. One  ruler  of  this  name sent  his  son  Louis  to go  on the  Albigensian Crusade.  That  ruler  with  this  name  crushed  the  English  at  the  Battle  of  Bouvines  [[boo- VEEN]]. A Spanish ruler of this name invaded the Netherlands in the Eighty Years’ War, and that ruler of this name formed a fleet with the aim of deposing Elizabeth I that was defeated at  Gravelines  [[grav-LEEN]].  For  ten  points,  give  this  name  of  the  king  who  created  the Spanish Armada.	ANSWER: Philip (accept Philip IV; accept Philip II of France; accept Philip II of Spain; accept Felipe or Philippe in place of Philip)
The Black Panthers inspired a party composed and named for this group which led a renaissance  of  Maharashtra-based  literature  and  fine  arts  in  the  1970s.  The  term Harijan, which translates to "Children of God," was used to refer to this group of people in the early 20th century. Under the influence of Rajiv Gandhi, one parliament passed the Prevention of Atrocities  Act  in  an  attempt  to  halt  discrimination  against  this  class  of  people.  Mohandas Gandhi was an advocate for, for ten points, which ostracized class of the Indian caste system?	ANSWER: Untouchables (accept the Dalits; accept the Scheduled Caste; accept the Dalit Panthers)
A crossbowmen who may have practiced this discipline shot and killed Richard the Lionheart during a siege of Chalus in France. Caelius Apicius [[ah-PIH-kee-us]] wrote a work in  this  field  in  Vulgar  Latin  which  opens  with  the  chapter Epimeles,  or  "The  Careful Housekeeper."   Gervase  Markham   wrote   a   work   in   this   discipline   named The   English Housewife, including a chapter titled "Banqueting Stuff." De re culinaria is a pamphlet on, for ten points, what discipline which involves preparing food?	ANSWER: Cooking (accept Gastronomy; accept Culinary arts before "culinaria")  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 4
This man’s body was allegedly placed in a glass coffin, but a team of forensic scientists discovered  it  was  incorrectly  identified.  After  this  man  executed  the  loser  of  the  Battle  of Cajamarca  [[kah-hah-MAHR-kah]],  this  man  had  two  sons  with  his  widow,  renamed  Dona Angelina. This man’s life ended when supporters of Diego de Almagro's son stormed a palace and assassinated him, making Almagro the new Governor of Peru. For ten points, name this conquistador who founded Lima after destroying the Inca Empire.	ANSWER: Francisco Pizarro (or Francisco Pizarro González)
Queen Elizabeth II granted this title to Margot Fonteyn after her performance as the Queen of Air in Homage to the Queen. Following an international tour with the Kirov company, American  Eva  Evdokimova  [[ehv-DOH-kee-MOH-vah]]  was  given  the assoluta form  of  this designation. The solo dance known as The Dying Swan was originated by a person with this specific  designation,  Anna  Pavlova,  who  held  the  title  while  a  member  of  Ballet  Russes [[ROOSE]]. The most talented and experienced ballet dancers in a company are given, for ten points, which designation?	ANSWER: Prima ballerina (prompt on partial answers; accept Prima ballerina assoluta)
This  thinker  was  invited  to  a  feast  by  Emperor  Frederick  II,  to  whom  this  man dedicated  his Book  of Squares.  For  his  technical  work,  like  solving  several  problems  by Johannes  of  Palermo,  this  man  was  granted  a  lifetime  salary  by  his  home  city  of  Pisa.  This man's work Liber Abaci popularized Indo-Arabic numerals in the western world, as well as a biologically relevant namesake series of numbers. For ten points, name this medieval Italian mathematician whose namesake "sequence" begins, "0, 1, 1, 2, 3."	ANSWER: Fibonacci (accept Leonardo Bonacci; or Leonardo of Pisa; or Leonardo Bigano Pisano; accept Fibonacci Numbers; or Fibonacci Sequence)
This  man  publicly  protested  segregation  by  sharing  a  small  pool  with  an  African- American character, Officer Clemmons, in a 1969 episode of his namesake series. This man quoted that show by saying "What Do You Do with the Mad that You Feel?" in an argument to save funding for PBS while testifying in front of the Senate Subcommittee of Communications in  1969.  The  opening  theme  "Won't  You  Be  My  Neighbor?"  was  written  by,  for  ten  points, which host of a long-running children's TV show about [this man's] Neighborhood?	ANSWER: Fred Rogers (accept Mister Rogers; accept Mister Rogers' Neighborhood)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 4
During  this  event,  the  generals  Aleksei  Peshchurov  [[pehsh-CHOO-roff]]  and  Lovell Rousseau oversaw a flag transfer ceremony in the town of New Archangel. The extinction of a local sea otter population and the monetary deficit experienced after the Crimean War led to this event, which was negotiated by Eduard de Stoeckl [[STOW-kuhl]]. Detractors of this action  dubbed  it  both  "Seward's  Icebox"  and  "Seward's  Folly."  For  ten  points,  name  this acquisition by the Andrew Johnson administration of a Russian colony in North America.	ANSWER: Alaska Purchase (or Purchase of Alaska; accept synonymous answers like Buying Alaska; accept Prodazha Alyaski; or Sale of Alaska)
In a work in this language, the eardstapa, or "Wanderer," is in self-imposed exile after losing his lord and fellow retainers during a raid. The long form poem The Age of Anxiety by W.H. Auden is in this specific language, emulating an early style of alliterative verse. The limbs of a monster named Grendel are taken off in a mead hall by the title hero of an epic poem in this language. The poem Beowulf is written in, for ten points, which medieval language of the British isles influenced by Old Norse?	ANSWER: Old English (accept Anglo-Saxon; accept Englisċ; prompt on "English"; do not accept "Middle English")   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 4
Charles  E.  Mitchell  briefly  halted  this  event,  which  was  predicted  by  Roger  Babson’s  namesake “break.” Richard Whitney attempted to curtail the damage caused by this event, which was studied by the Pecora Commission. The Glass-Steagall Act was passed in the wake of this event and required commercial and  investment  banking  operations  to  be  separated.  Margin  calls  fueled  panic  on  “Black  Monday”  and “Black Tuesday” during, for ten points, what inciting incident of the Great Depression?	ANSWER: WallStreetcrashof  1929  (orstockmarketcrashof  1929;  prompt  on  Black  Thursday and/or Black Tuesday before mentioned; prompt on the Great Depression before mentioned)
In the leadup to this war, Ansar al-Islam was defeated in the north by a CIA-supported force from the Peshmerga. Lynndie England was imprisoned for dereliction of duty during this war for mistreating POWs. Four years after his war began, a “surge” strategy was employed by the commander of the Multi National  Force,  David  Petraeus.  Colin  Powell  argued  at  the  UN  that  the  presence  of  weapons  of  mass destruction was enough pretext to launch, for ten points, what war that toppled Saddam Hussein?	ANSWER: IraqWar (accept OperationIraqiFreedom; acceptSecondPersianGulfWar, but do not prompt on “Gulf (War)” alone)
Note: two answers required. The Seven Missions territory changed hands in a 1750 treaty between these two countries. The bullAeterni Regissignified papal approval of a treaty signed between these two countries. Both of these countries’ claims to the Moluccas Islands led to the 1529 Treaty of Zaragoza, a follow-up to an earlier agreement that a line 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands would be used to separate New World claims. The Treaty of Tordesillas was signed by, for ten points, what two Iberian countries?	ANSWER: SpainandPortugal
This  man  and  John  Stott  co-founded  the  Lausanne  Movement.  This  deliverer  of  the  “My  Hope America” speech said “We have to stand in the middle in order to preach to all people” as a reason why he refused to join Jerry Falwell’s Moral Majority.Hour of Decisionwas broadcast in the early 1950s by this man, who went on hundreds of namesake Christianizing crusades. For ten points, name this celebrity Southern Baptist evangelist who advised twelve US Presidents.	ANSWER: William Franklin “Billy” GrahamJr.
This character uses the informal insult “Casse toi”[cah-sayTWAH] in his opening appearance before declaring  himself  “the  best.”  This  figure,  who  announces  “I’m  takin’  this  horse  by  the  reins,  makin’ Redcoats  redder  with  bloodstains,”  tries  to  rhyme  “anarchy”  with  “monarchy”  shortly  before  Hercules Mulligan  and  John  Laurens  give  their  verses  in  the  song  “My  Shot.”  Daveed  Diggs  portrayed  Thomas Jefferson and this man in the original Broadway cast ofHamilton. For ten points, name this marquis who aided the colonies during the American Revolution.	ANSWER: (Marie-Joseph Paul Yves Roch) Gilbert du Motier, Marquis deLafayette(accept either or both underlined names) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 4
This city was the site of a 1911 uprising remembered by the Yellow Flower Mound. The Whampoa Military Academy was founded in this city, which was made a treaty port under the Nanking Treaty. The Thirteen Factories were located in this city, where Hongs managed trade with Europeans. This port city on the Pearl River was connected to Hong Kong via the Kowloon-Canton Railway in 1910. For ten points, name this southern Chinese city in Guangdong.	ANSWER: Guangzhou(orCantonbefore mentioned)
A composer from this country who wrote a series ofChˆoros [SHO-roos] and took inspiration from Bach for hisBachianaswas commissioned to write his Third Symphony, subtitled “War,” as a celebration of  the  Treaty  of  Versailles.  A  major  event  in  this  country  calls  for  afoxˆe  music  and  involves  a  music competition that takes place at the Sambadrome. Heitor Villa-Lobos is from this country, where Antonio Carlos  Jobim  and  Jo ̃ao  Gilberto  popularized  bossa  nova.  For  ten  points,  name  this  South  American country where samba music is played in the Carnival parades in Rio de Janeiro.	ANSWER: Federative Republic of Brazil
Karl Radek argued against signing this treaty, arguing that revolutions would soon occur that would render it unnecessary. This treaty, whose terms were annulled in the Treaty of Rapallo, made the Kars Oblast an Ottoman territory. Demands for “peace, land, and bread” fueled one side to accept the harsh terms of this treaty, which included giving control of the Baltic States to Germany. For ten points, name this 1918 treaty that took Russia out of World War I.	ANSWER: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
This  man’s  reputation  was  hurt  when  his  aide  John  Armstrong  attempted  to  launch  a  coup  in the  Newburgh  Conspiracy.  The  Conway  Cabal  aimed  to  place  this  man  in  full  command  of  the  army. Cornwallis routed this man’s forces at the Battle of Camden in 1780, three years after this man was more successful  in  forcing  the  surrender  of  John  Burgoyne  in  New  York.  For  ten  points,  name  this  colonial commander who won the Battle of Saratoga.	ANSWER: Horatio Gates
This leader oversaw the abolition of privy purses by passing the 26th constitutional amendment in 1971. This leader’s son Sanjay advocated for a mass sterilization program that this leader implemented during  a  period  known  as  the  Emergency.  This  leader  was  assassinated  in  retaliation  for  launching  a military assault on Amritsar’s Golden Temple as part of Operation Blue Star. For ten points, name this daughter of Jawarhalal Nehru, the first female Prime Minister of India.	ANSWER:IndiraGandhi(prompt on “Gandhi”) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 4
This action was supported by Eduardo Frei’s Christian Democratic Party and occurred after sweeping gains for one leader’s party in midterm elections. The target of this event gave a radio broadcast that he ended with the words “Long live the people! Long live the workers!”, then used a gold-plated AK-47 to commit suicide while barricaded in La Moneda Palace. For ten points, name this event that led to the rise of the military dictator Augusto Pinochet.	ANSWER: overthrowof  SalvadorAllende(acceptdeathof  SalvadorAllende;  accept  descriptions of acoupd’etat against SalvadorAllende; accept descriptions of the1973Chilecoupd’etat; accept descriptions of “thecoupd’etat that brought AugustoPinochetto power” before his name is mentioned)
In the 1971 edition of this game, success was determined by how fast and accurately they typed words like “BANG” or “WOW.” MECC produced this game, in which taking the Barlow Road or floating across the Columbia River Gorge are the two options for players as they approach Willamette Valley. The player is responsible for leading for leading a wagon party starting at Independence, Missouri in, for ten points, what classic educational computer game that shares its name with a pioneer route?	ANSWER: The OregonTrail
This politician issued a namesake Moratorium in an attempt to give Germany more time to catch up  on  reparation  payments.  In  another  postwar  role,  this  man  organized  Belgian  food  relief  efforts. The  Smoot-Hawley  Tariff  was  signed  by  this  man,  who  promised  “a  chicken  in  every  pot”  during  his presidential  campaign.  As  unemployment  peaked,  shantytowns  became  named  for,  for  ten  points,  what president who led the US into the Great Depression?	ANSWER: Herbert Hoover
This medium was created by Otto von Guericke’s Magdeburg hemispheres, a demonstration of the strength  of  air  pressure.  Inverting  a  barometer  onto  a  dish  of  mercury  proved  to  Torricelli  that  this medium  was  created  when  internal  and  external  atmospheric  pressure  reached  equilibrium.  Leucippus’s atomic theory, which argued that all particles move in this medium, countered Parmenides’s claim that “nature abhors” this state. For ten points, give this term for a space that does not contain matter.	ANSWER: vacuum
This man was appointed king by Mongol ruler Sartaq Khan and died shortly after traveling to Sarai to  pay  tribute.  This  man  thwarted  Hermann  of  Dorpat  from  capturing  Pskov  during  a  battle  in  which the lake Peipus had frozen over. Before that battle against the Teutonic Knights, this man rose to fame defending Novgorod against the Swedes. For ten points, name this ruler of Kiev known for a victory on Lake Peipus at the Battle of the Ice.	ANSWER: Alexander Nevsky Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
This  city’s  DusitD2  hotel  and  office  complex  was  targeted  in  a  January  2019  terrorist  attack  that killed 21 people in the Westlands neighborhood. In the same neighborhood in 2013, over 60 people were killed  and  200  wounded  in  a  similar  attack,  also  carried  out  by  members  of  al-Shabaab,  at  this  city’s Westgate shopping mall. In August 1998, Al-Qaida bombed the US embassies in Dar es Salaam and, for ten points, what capital city of Kenya?	ANSWER: Nairobi
Edward  Larson  wrote  a  history  of  this  election  year  titledA  Magnificent  Catastrophe.  William Freehling  claims  that  the  Three-Fifths  clause  was  central  to  the  incumbent’s  loss  in  this  election  year, whose winner gave a diplomatic inaugural address in which he claimed “We are all Republicans, we are all  Federalists.”  A  Federalist  supported  a  rival  in  this  election  year  by  claiming  he  was  “by  far  not  so dangerous  a  man”  as  Aaron  Burr.  Alexander  Hamilton  played  a  crucial  role  in,  for  ten  points,  what election year in which Thomas Jefferson replaced John Adams as President?	ANSWER: US Presidential election of 1800
In this US state, Augustus Stinchfield partnered with a British man to form a private medical practice. Miners flocked to this state following a discovery in its Vermilion Range. Charles Alfred Pillsbury founded his namesake company in this state, where its flour mills competed with rival General Mills. Iron ore from mountains in this state was transported by train to cities like Duluth. The Mayo Clinic was founded in Rochester in, for ten points, what US state where 3M is headquartered in a suburb of St. Paul?	ANSWER: Minnesota
Resistance against Nazi occupation in this city was led by an organization whose logo was the letters “PW”  in  the  shape  of  an  anchor,  the  AK  or  Home  Army.  Mikhail  Tukhachevsky  was  defeated  outside this city by Jozef Pilsudski in the “Miracle on the Vistula.” The Z.O.B. led a revolt in this city that was defeated by Jurgen Stroop, after which most of the Jewish Combat Association was deported to Treblinka. For ten points, name this city whose ghetto underwent a major revolt in 1943 in Poland.	ANSWER: Warsaw(orWarszawa)
In a battle during this campaign, theUSS Choctawwas hit more than fifty times without suffering any casualties. This campaign included the Battle of Snyder’s Bluff and a battle where troops marching up Rodney Road were attacked by the forces of John Bowen, the Battle of Port Gibson. This campaign’s most famous battle ended with the surrender of John Pemberton on July 4th. The Army of the Tennessee fought in, for ten points, what Grant-led Union campaign named for a Mississippi city that was besieged in 1863?	ANSWER: VicksburgCampaign Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
William Mead and this man were accused of “speaking in Gracechurch Street,” but when the jury refused  to  a  provide  a  guilty  verdict,  the  judge  starved  the  jury  for  two  days  before  imprisoning  them, too. This man wroteNo Cross, No Crownwhile imprisoned in the Tower of London for allegedly denying the Trinity. In order to pay a debt to this man’s father, Charles II made this man the largest non-royal landowner  in  the  world.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Quaker  who  founded  an  American  colony  governed from Philadelphia.	ANSWER: William Penn
As a teenager, this thinker built a calculator to aid his father’s work as a tax supervisor. This man developed a law stating that a change in pressure at a point in a fluid is transmitted equally throughout the entire fluid. This man, who argued in support of Jansenism inProvincial Letters, names a diagram that conveniently displays the binomial coefficients; each value equals the sum of the two numbers above it in that “triangle.” For ten points, name this 17th century French polymath.	ANSWER: Blaise Pascal
The Pont Neuf was completed during the reign of this French monarch; its financing was overseen by  this  man’s chief minister,  Maximilien  de  Bethune, the  Duke  of  Sully.  This  king’s  mistress, Gabrielle d’Estr ́ees [dess-tray],  supposedly  convinced  him  to  proclaim  that  Paris  was  “well  worth  a  mass”  when he converted from Protestantism to Catholicism. For ten points, name this king who supported religious toleration via the Edict of Nantes, the first monarch from the House of Bourbon.	ANSWER:HenryIV(acceptHenry(III)ofNavarre, but do not accept or prompt on Henry III alone; prompt on Henry)
One response to this event was delayed when David Ige[ee-gay] forgot his Twitter password. This event, which took place during a shift-change operation, involved a failure to hear the words “Exercise, exercise, exercise,” though it was originally blamed on a worker pressing the wrong button in a drop-down menu.  The  Emergency  Alert  System  declared  “THIS  IS  NOT  A  DRILL”  during,  for  ten  points,  what January 13, 2018 event that caused a brief panic in Honolulu?	ANSWER: 2018 Hawaiiballisticmissilefalsealarmincident (accept descriptive answers that incorporate all three underlined ideas; prompt on answers with only one or two of the three underlined ideas; accept descriptions  of  a nuclearattack  in  place  of  ballistic  missile;  accept  any  place  in  Hawaii,  including Honolulubefore it is mentioned, in place of Hawaii)
This man was known as the “fierce” in his early years after murdering 99 of his 100 brothers. This man,  who  rose  to  power  after  tricking  Sushima  into  a  pit  of  hot  coals,  was  traumatized  by  seeing  the Daya river allegedly run red with blood in the Kalinga wars. This son of Bindusara erected a rock edict at Sarnath detailing the importance of good deeds and adherence to Dharma. For ten points, name this Mauryan ruler who converted to Buddhism.	ANSWER: Ashoka the Great (orAsoka the Great) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 4
One work in this genre describes three generations of tribesmen led by Seitek, Semetei, and Manas. The demon Adamastor is battled by a group of sailors in one of these pieces of literature that tells of Vasco de  Gama’s  voyage  to  India.  Elias  Lonrot  compiled  one  of  these  works  of  literature  from  oral  tradition, including the story of the creation of the Sampo. TheLusiadsand theKalevalaare examples of, for ten points, what type of literature with a grand scope, such as theOdyssey?	ANSWER: epicpoems (accept nationalepics; prompt on poems)
Prior to this event, covering fire from David Conner’s Home Squadron allowed a commander to land his  forces  uncontested  on  Collado[co-yah-doh]  Beach.  Fighting  centered  around  the  fort  of  San  Juan de  Ul ́ua  during  this  event,  which  eventually  forced  the  surrender  of  Juan  Morales.  After  the  battles  of Monterrey and Buena Vista, Zachary Taylor’s forces were given to Winfield Scott in preparation for this campaign. For ten points, name this 1847 event that led to the capture of a key Mexican seaport.	ANSWER: Siege ofVeracruz
One artist from this country showed the key to city of Breda being surrendered to a general of this country’s  army.  In  another  work,  the  same  artist  included  a  self-portrait  next  to  the  reflection  of  this country’s  King  Phillip  IV  in  a  mirror.  Another  painter  active  in  this  country  was  born  in  Crete  and painted a landscape showing a “View of” of this country’s city of Toledo [toh-LAY-doh]. For ten points, name this Iberian country home to the artist ofLas Meninas, Diego Velazquez.	ANSWER:Spain
This man wrote that Catholicism and Marxism were incompatible, as Marxism has been used as a weapon to disobey the Christian faith. David Yallop speculated that this man was poisoned to prevent further investigation of Paul Marcinkus and Roberto Calvi. This man’s death caused the most recent Year of Three Popes, as he was only in office for just over a month. For ten points, name this Pope who was succeeded in 1978 by Karol Wojtyla [voy-twah], a Polish cardinal whose papal name honored this man.	ANSWER:JohnPaulI(or AlbinoLuciani; prompt on John Paul; do not prompt on John or Paul alone)
This politician introduced a bill to reduce infant mortality that initially did not reach the floor, but inspired the creation of the Sheppard-Towner Act in the next Congress. After losing a Republican primary to Oscar Lanstrum, this politician ran with the National Party but finished third behind Lanstrum and Thomas Walsh. This politician reasoned “I can’t go to war, and I refuse to send anyone else” when she became the sole vote against declaring war on Japan. For ten points, name this Montana politician, the first female member of Congress.	ANSWER: Jeannette Rankin Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 4
This  man  shared  power  with  Nikolai  Podgorny  and  Alexander  Kosygin  in  the  early  years  of  his leadership,  and  his  poor  economic  planning  led  to  the  beginning  of  the  Era  of  Stagnation.  This  leader joined  Jimmy  Carter  in  signing  the  SALT  II  accords.  He  justified  military  intervention  to  protect communism in a namesake doctrine. For ten points, name this Soviet General Secretary who succeeded Nikita Khrushchev.	ANSWER: Leonid Brezhnev
This country’s Catatumbo River has more lightning than anywhere else on Earth. A brackish inlet in  this  country  was  home  to  a  1914  oil  discovery  and  an  1823  naval  battle  that  earned  this  country’s independence from Spain. This country is home to the tallest waterfall in the world, Angel Falls, and the mouth of the Orinoco River. Lake Maracaibo is found in, for ten points, what South American country where a “Bolivarian Revolution” was led by Hugo Chavez?	ANSWER: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
A campaign against these people began when Galerius was told that their existence prevented the Oracle at Delphi from speaking. The catacombs of Rome were predominantly used for the burial of these people. Though these people suffered the Diocletianic Persecution and Nero blamed them for causing the Great Fire, they were eventually granted legal status in the 313 AD Edict of Milan. For ten points, name this monotheistic faith adopted by Constantine the Great.	ANSWER: Christians
A theme in Mozart’s twenty-fifth piano concerto is sometimes cited as this song’s source. Pyotr Lavrov wrote a “worker’s” version of this song, which was originally written by Claude Rouget de Lisle as “War Song for the Rhine Army.” A musical depiction of the Battle of Borodino juxtaposes this song with “God Save The Tsar.” This song was quoted in Tchaikovsky’s1812  Overture, where it represents Napoleon’s army. For ten points, name this revolutionary song, the national anthem of France.	ANSWER: La Marseillaise[mar-say-ehz]
This organization was criticized for being unable to control the Orange Riots. Charles Murphy tried to  reform  this  organization,  which  supported  Al  Smith  for  President  in  1928.  Jimmy  Hines  was  unable to  stop  this  organization’s  defeat  by  Fiorello  LaGuardia.  A  leader  of  this  organization  was  targeted  by Samuel Tilden and depicted with a bag of money for a head by Thomas Nast. For ten points, name this Democratic political machine in New York City that was dominated by Boss Tweed.	ANSWER: TammanyHall  (or  the  Society  of  St.Tammanyor  the  Sons  of  St.Tammanyor  the ColumbianOrder) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 4
This  organization  used  a  code  called  PURPLE  to  conceal  diplomatic  messages.  This  organization built  a  fortress  at  Rabaul  and  was  the  target  of  the  Great  Turkey  Shoot.  This  military  force  defeated Force  Z,  consisting  of  thePrince  of  Walesand  theRepulse,  which  had  been  sent  to  reinforce  Malaya. Its  forces  were  concentrated  in  the  Combined  Fleet,  which  suffered  the  loss  of  four  aircraft  carriers  at the Battle of Midway. For ten points, name this military force that fought America in the Pacific Ocean during World War II.	ANSWER:  Imperial JapaneseNavy(acceptIJN;  acceptCombinedFleetuntil  mentioned;  accept descriptive answers; prompt on answers describing Japan’s military, including “Japan’s army”)
After  rising  to  power,  this  group  banned  the  practice  of  “Bacha  Bazi”  between  Pashtun  warlords. Some former supporters of this group have defected to ISIs’s Khorasan Province branch. In March 2001, this group demolished giant, centuries-old statues of the Buddha in Bamiyan Province; later in 2001, this group was ousted from power by a NATO-led coalition. For ten points, name this Sunni terrorist group that operates in Afghanistan.	ANSWER: Taliban
This President won the presidency thanks to James Birney’s Liberty Party sapping his opponent’s anti-slavery support in states like New York. He died just three months after leaving office, a record for shortest Presidential retirement. This man is the only President to have once been Speaker of the House. Supporters of this “dark horse” winner chanted “54-40 or fight!” in endorsing his policy of expansionism. For ten points, name this U.S. President during the Mexican-American War.	ANSWER: James KnoxPolk
A character in this play claims that a sunburn could  not  make his face any worse looking. In this play, it is said that Arthur’s bosom is the destination of the dead Falstaff. At a charge at Harfleur, this play’s title character declares “Once more unto the breach,” and later uses the phrase “we few, we happy few, we band of brothers” to open the St. Crispin’s Day Speech. For ten points, name this Shakespeare history play about the British king who won the Battle of Agincourt.	ANSWER: HenryV(do not prompt on Henry)
This  man  claimed  that  there  were  400  neatly  marked  graves  because  one  soldier  slept.  As  part of  Operation  Fortitude,  this  man  was  assigned  command  of  the  fictitious  First  U.S  Army  Group.  This general led the breakout from Normandy and the relief of the garrison of Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge, but was relieved of command after two slapping incidents in North Africa and Sicily. For ten points, name this aggressive commander of the American Third Army during World War II.	ANSWER: George S. PattonJr. Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 4
John Cutler attempted to discover a vaccination for this disease through human studies in Sing Sing Prison.  Cutler also led an experiment where Juan Jos ́e Ar ́evalo allowed Guatemalans to be infected with this disease.  This disease was given to participants in a study that claimed to treat “bad blood” to study its untreated progression, even after the discovery of penicillin.  Spirochete bacteria spread, for ten points, what sexually transmitted disease that was given to African-Americans at the Tuskegee Institute?	ANSWER: syphilis
The  first  person  prosecuted  under  this  legislation  was  Vermont  congressman  Matthew  Lyon,  and another of its targets was the Philadelphia Aurora.  The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions declared these bills  unconstituional,  and  three  of  them  were  repealed  when  the  Democratic-Republican  Party  came  to power in 1800.  For ten points, name this quartet of laws signed by John Adams in 1798 that enabled the government to expel foreigners and punish anti-government speech.	ANSWER:AlienandSeditionActs
This  author  is  the  title  character  of  a  J.M.  Coetzee  novel  that  centers  on  his  excised  chapter  “At Tikhon’s.” A dream about a man who beats a sickly horse troubles the protagonist of one of his novels, who later encounters a man who commits suicide after saying that he is “going to America.” That protagonist by  this  author  murders  the  pawnbroker  Alyona  Ivanovna,  and  eventually  rediscovers  Christianity  with Sonya’s help.  For ten points, name this creator of Rodion Raskolnikov, the author ofDemonsandCrime and Punishment.	ANSWER: Fyodor Dostoyevsky
This  event  was  precipitated  by  armed  unrest  led  by  the  CGL  during  the  “two  red  years.”  U.S. Ambassador Richard Child gave tacit American approval of this event before it began, shortly after news of Gabriele d’Annunzio’s similarly planned event.  Luigi Facta resigned in the wake of this event, whose leader  remained  in  Milan  in  case  it  failed.   For  ten  points,  name  this  1922  demonstration  by  tens  of thousands of Blackshirts, the supporters of Benito Mussolini.	ANSWER:MarchonRome
In one of these conflicts, William Eaton led an expedition to capture Derna, and one ship ran aground by William Bainbridge was burned by the crew of the USSIntrepid.  The USSPhiladelphiawas burned in the first of these conflicts by Stephen Decatur, and Decatur’s capture of theMeshudaduring the second of these wars led to peace with Tunis, Tripoli, and Algeria.  For ten points, name these early 19th century wars between the United States and a group of North African states.	ANSWER: BarbaryWars Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 4
During  the  Asuka  period  in  Japan,  taxes  were  levied  on  this  material  and  cotton.   With  gold  and grain,  it  served  as  a  currency  during  the  Han  Dynasty.   A  pathway  associated  with  it  was  originally mapped  by  Zhang  Qian[Jang-Chyen],  and,  through  smuggling,  Justinian’s  Byzantine  Empire  acquired the  means  for  this  good’s  production:  mulberry  seeds  and  the  eggs  of  a  certain  worm.   For  ten  points, name this fabric whose namesake “road” was a trade network linking China to Europe.	ANSWER: silk(prompt on textiles)
A decade after the Prague Spring, a similar event in this city was ended by the punishment of people involved in the April Fifth Incident.  One man who ruled from this city was targeted by the never-executed Project  5-7-1.   The  Fifth  Modernization  was  first  posted  in  this  city,  where  a  Goddess  of  Democracy was erected during a 1989 protest put down by Deng Xiaoping.  The Bird’s Nest Arena is located in, for ten points,  what site of the 2008 Summer Olympics and Tienanmen Square,  the capital of the People’s Republic of China?	ANSWER: Beijing(acceptPeking)
The  term  “Scissors  Crisis”  was  coined  by  this  man  in  response  to  a  failure  of  the  NEP.  His forces  supressed  Stepan  Petrichenko’s  Kronstadt  Rebellion.   This  man’s  supporters  established  Fourth International to compete with the Comintern.  This man criticized the notion of “socialism in one country,” instead espousing a “permanent revolution,” but he was killed by a man with an ice pick while in exile in Mexico City.  For ten points, name this Soviet politician who led the leftist opposition against Josef Stalin.	ANSWER: Leon Trotsky(or LevBronshtein)
Lieutenant  Ryan  Philips  flew  the  speaker  in  this  event  to  the  USSAbraham Lincoln.   This  speech commemorated the removal of a “grave threat” and liberation of “an oppressed people,” though Donald Rumsfeld  attempted  to  edit  its  language.   This  speech,  given  exactly  eight  years  before  the  death  of Osama bin Laden, announced the end of “major” combat operations in Iraq.  For ten points, name this 2003  speech  delivered  by  President  George  W.  Bush  in  front  of  a  banner  displaying  a  controversially triumphant phrase.	ANSWER: MissionAccomplishedspeech  (prompt  on  otherwise-accurate  descriptions  that  don’t  use that phrase)
In Nazi concentration camps, this group was identified by a single purple triangle.  The 1943Barnette case established that this group could refuse to recite the Pledge of Allegiance.  Founded by Charles Taze Russell, this group believes that 144,000 people will enter Heaven and practices a form of shunning known as “disfellowship.” Proscriptions against military service and blood transfusions are held by, for ten points, what non-Trinitarian Christian sect that publishesThe Watchtower?	ANSWER:Jehovah’sWitnesses
Quebec Governor Lord Dorchester was approached for assistance by one side during this event. A leader of this rebellion previously took part in the Groton Riots and was arrested near  the  Nashua  River.  Besides  Job Shattuck,  another  leader  of  this  rebellion  worked  with Luke Day, though William Shepard stopped them from taking Springfield Courthouse. Courts in Worcester were shut down by regulators during this event. For ten points, name this 1786 to 1787 rebellion in Massachusetts against tax collection by Revolutionary War Veterans.	ANSWER: Shays' Rebellion (accept synonymous answers for "Rebellion" such as "Uprising")
Leo von Klenze [[KLEN-zuh]] built a temple named for this place under the auspices of Ludwig of Bavaria, and included several busts of historical Germans. The legendary king Vanlandi visited this site in a work that describes a "historical" figure's law about the dead being burned and their ashes buried. The Heimskringla discusses that ritual for reaching this place,  which  is  accomplished  by  Eric  Bloodaxe,  king  of  Norway,  in  an  epic  poem.  For  ten points, name this mythical hall of slain warriors that Norse pagans believed awaited them in the afterlife.	ANSWER: Valhalla (or Walhalla; accept Walhalla Temple)
This  man's  most  significant  expeditions  were  completed  with  assistance  from  his countryman Martin Spangberg. Dockyards in Okhotsk built the Fortune, a ship used by this explorer to undertake the First Kamchatka Expedition with support from Peter the Great. The Siberian  coast  was  mapped  by  this  explorer,  who  was  temporarily  shipwrecked  off  the Aleutian coast during a 1741 expedition. A strait separating Alaska from the Far East region of Russia is named for, for ten points, which Danish explorer?	ANSWER: Vitus Bering (accept Bering Strait; or Bering Sea; or Bering Island)
One  of  these  items  found  at  Takalik  Abaj  [[tah-KAH-leek  AH-bah]]  that  was  turned into an altar is the only one found outside a certain region. The material for these items was mined  at  La  Cobata  [[koh-BAH-tah]],  and  the  distinct  features  of  these  items  indicate  they represent rulers of the culture that created them. A popular pseudo-historical theory argues the features of these items show “African influences.” For ten points, name these distinctive artworks of the Mesoamerican “mother-culture” found at sites like San Lorenzo and La Venta.	ANSWER: Olmec colossal heads (prompt on partial answers; accept synonymous answers such as Statues of Olmec Heads)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 5
In this nation's mythology, a horned, transparent man known as the "Divine Farmer" introduced  agricultural  techniques  and  various  drugs.  The  mother  goddess  of  this  nation's myth system, Nuwa, was a turtle who held the heavens and Earth on her back. This nation was created by the breath of Pangu with the help of the Kirin and the immortal Phoenix, and the first mythical king of its Xia [[SHAH]] dynasty was Yu the Great. For ten points, name this country whose populace was wiped out by a mythical great flood of its Yellow River.	ANSWER: China (accept Zhongguo)
John Edward McGilvrey was the first head of this university created by the Lowry Bill, and George Hammond created its plan. William Oxley Thompson opposed this school in the "Credit War" over transfer credits. Allison Krause and William Schroeder were killed at this university, where a Joseph Filo picture showed a screaming Mary Ann Vecchio. A protest at this  university  forced  Ohio  governor  Jim  Rhodes  to  ask  for  assistance  from  the  National Guard.  For  ten  points,  name  this university,  where  four  students  were  shot  dead  during  a 1970 Vietnam War protest.	ANSWER: Kent State University (accept Kent State Massacre; or Kent State Shooting)
A puppet king of this city, Kandalanu, was installed after the previous puppet king led a  rebellion.  After  destroying  this  city,  the  king  Sennacherib  supposedly  died  from  divine retribution. An empire based in this city fell when Nabonidus lost the Battle of Opis. A king of this city established a law code with rules like "an eye for an eye." A "captivity" of Jews named for  this  city  ended  when  it  was  conquered  by  Cyrus  the  Great.  For  ten  points,  name  this Mesopotamian city ruled by Hammurabi and home to the Hanging Gardens.	ANSWER: Babylon (accept Babilim)
In 1946, the Soviet Union prevented a production of this work "on the grounds that the  drama  [would]  inspire  a  [...]  suicide  wave."  This  play  was  first  performed  at  McCarter Theatre in New Jersey before transferring to Broadway, where Edward Albee hailed it as “the greatest American play ever written.” Told in three acts, this metatheatrical play features an omniscient  stage  manager  who  oversees  the  performance  and  is  set  in  Grover's  Corners,  a "typical  American  community."  For  ten  points,  name  this  play  by  Thornton  Wilder,  which earned him his first Pulitzer Prize for Drama.	ANSWER: Our Town  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 5
With his officers, this leader organized the Bayard Order to put on plays and patronize the  arts.  Voltaire  revised  this  man's  essay Anti-Machiavel,  which  was  a  scathing  critique  of cynicism  in The  Prince.  This  leader  nearly  ran  away  to  England  with  his  male  lover,  Hans Hermann von Katte, though he was caught and forced to watch Katte's execution by his father, Frederick  William.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Crown  Prince-turned-King  of  Prussia,  who became famous for his military genius.	ANSWER: Frederick the Great (or Friedrich der Große [["GROSS"-uh]]; accept Frederick II; or Friedrich II; accept Old Fritz; or Der Alte Fritz)
Tarzan creator Edgar Rice Burroughs's relative Kate Rice found gold deposits in this province  at  sites  like  Wekusko  Lake  and  Thompson.  The  precursor  to  the  Royal  Mounted Police  broke-up  this  province's  "General  Strike  of  1919"  which  occurred  following  their participation  in  World  War  One.  Led  by  Louis  Real  [[reh-AHL]],  the  Red  River  Rebellion resulted in the foundation of this province, the first carved from the Northwest Territories. The city of Winnipeg was the site of that rebellion in, for ten points, what Canadian province?	ANSWER: Manitoba   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 5
Quakers and Anglicans fought over this state’s governorship in Cary’s Rebellion. This modern-day state  was  home  to  the  Albemarle  Settlements,  and  its  Halifax  Resolves  were  the  first  official  resolution calling for American independence. This state and a southern neighbor were granted to Robert Heath as Cape Fear in 1629. The Battle of Guilford Court House took place in, for ten points, what Mid-Atlantic state with capital at Raleigh?	ANSWER: NorthCarolina
After putting down Quintus Cassius Longinus’s rebellion in Spain, this man received a triumph and was Master of the Horse twice under Julius Caesar. This man, who served as the last pontifex maximus of the Roman Republic after Caesar’s death, was overthrown after trying to claim Sicily after the final defeat of Sextus Pompey, setting the stage for the final showdown between Antony and Octavian. For ten points, name this third member of the Second Triumvirate.	ANSWER: Marcus Aemilius Lepidus
Mappin  &  Webb  marketed  the  “Famed  Campaign”  brand  of  these  objects  after  the  Battle  of Omdurman, and Joseph Stalin named a brand of these objects “Pobeda,” or “Victory,” to be sold starting in 1946. The technology behind these objects was revolutionized by the use of crystals that oscillate at a  frequency  of  two  to  the  15th  power  hertz,  leading  to  the  so-called  “Quartz  Crisis”  for  slow-adapting competitors of Seiko and Citizen. New York City’s Canal Street is home to counterfeit vendors of, for ten points, what personal timepieces produced by Rolex?	ANSWER: watches (do not prompt on clocks)
In a speech at Boston’s Home Market Club, this man noted that the U.S. needs to “put an end to false  economics  which  lure  humanity  to  utter  chaos”  in  a  speech  that  opens  by  blaming  a  “fever  [that] has rendered men irrational.” This man argued that “America’s present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but” the slogan of his presidential campaign, in which he beat Leonard Wood on the tenth ballot at the nominating convention and beat James Cox in the election. For ten points, name this US president who promised a “Return to Normalcy” after World War I.	ANSWER: Warren Gamaliel Harding
During this man’s reign, the Lingqu Canal was built as part of a system connecting the Yangtze and Pearl Rivers. This man survived an assassination attempt in which a heavy metal cone was dropped on his carriage from atop a mountain. This man, who was advised by chancellor Li Si to make Legalism the official ideology, targeted the Hundred Schools of Thought by burning Confucian books and buried their scholars alive. The Terracotta Army was commissioned by, for ten points, what first emperor of a unified China?	ANSWER: Qin ShiHuangdi (acceptYingZheng; acceptZhaoZheng; acceptKingZhengof Qin) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
A photograph taken in this city shows two men wielding pistols taking cover behind a forklift. An event  in  this  city  was  partially  fueled  by  a  store  owner  receiving  probation  for  the  murder  of  Latasha Harlins over the suspected theft of a $1.79 bottle of orange juice. During an event in this city referred to as Sa-I-Gu, Richard Rhee and 20 of his employees set up an armed camp to defend the California Market. For ten points, name this city where racial tensions between the Korean and Black communities exploded after four police officers were acquitted for the beating of Rodney King.	ANSWER: LosAngeles(acceptLA)
A black-and-white photo of a 1913 rally is juxtaposed with a photo of this event that was digitally altered  by  the  National  Archives  for  an  exhibit  celebrating  the  centennial  of  the  19th  Amendment;  the alterations included blurring part of the phrase “God hates Trump.” Vanessa Wruble co-led this event, whose attendance dwarfed that of a ceremony held the previous day. For ten points, name this January 21, 2017 rally, the largest single-day protest in American history, against the policies of Donald Trump.	ANSWER: 2017 Women’sMarch(accept 2017Women’sMarchon Washington; accept descriptive answers that include the words Women’sMarch)
Adam  of  Bremen  claimed  that  the  people  of  Uppsala  would  sacrifice  animals  to  this  god  during wartime. Through the process ofinterpretatio romana, Tacitus equated this deity with Mercury. Animals may have been hung by the neck in honor of this god’s impalement and self-hanging from Yggdrasil to receive knowledge of the runes. The day Wednesday is believed to have been derived from the name of, for ten points, what one-eyed chief god of the Norse pantheon, the father of Thor?	ANSWER:Odin(acceptWotan)
A member of this family calmed an angry crowd at the execution of George Burroughs by claiming that  he  was  “no  ordained  minister.”  The  workRemarkable  Provinces,  which  contains  selections  from the controversialMalleus  Maleficarum, was written by a member of this family. During a 1692 event, a member of this family warned John Richards against the use of spectral evidence. The Salem Witch Trials involved, for ten points, what powerful Puritan family that included Increase and Cotton?	ANSWER: Matherfamily (accept CottonMather; acceptIncreaseMather after “Remarkable” is read)
These people were able to place a poster on a monarch’s bedchamber door at Amboise[am-BWAHZ] in the Affair of the Placards. These people, who attempted to settle Fort Caroline, were massacred two days after an attack on one of them, Gaspard de Coligny. Catherine de Medici probably ordered the St. Bartholomew’s  Day  Massacre  against  these  people,  the  subjects  of  Louis  XIV’s  Edict  of  Fontainebleau and Henry IV’s Edict of Nantes. For ten points, name this group of French Calvinists.	ANSWER:Huguenots (prompt on French Protestants/Calvinists before mentioned) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
This group ceded control of the Bug River to Lithuania at the Battle of the Blue Waters. The Stand on the Ugra River symbolically marked the end of this group’s power, though it had earlier lost the Battle of Kulikovo to Dmitri Donskoy. This group once filled nine sacks with ears after defeating Henry the Pious at the Battle of Legnica[leg-neetz-ah]. This group was founded by Batu and forced Russia to pay tribute to the khan. For ten points, name this Mongol horde named for the color of its troops’ tents.	ANSWER: GoldenHorde(acceptKipchatKhanate; acceptUlusof Jochi; propmt on the Mongols)
This event, which inspired Michael Tippet’s oratorioA Child of Our Time, caused many people to flee to the Restricted Sector for Stateless Refugees in Shanghai. Reinhard Heydrich sent a secret telegram with instructions for this event, which included the arrests of tens of thousands of men. This event began on November 9th, exactly fifteen years after the Beer Hall Putsch, and featured mass looting of stores and burning of synagogues. For ten points, name this 1938 attack on German Jews, named for the shards of glass that flew during it.	ANSWER: Kristallnacht(acceptNightofBrokenGlassbefore “glass” is mentioned; prompt on it afterward)
This practice is often said to have begun in America with a Northampton County court case between Anthony  Johnson  and  Robert  Parker.  John  Punch  is  sometimes  seen  as  the  first  American  subject  of this practice, which theCode Noir, requiring Catholic education, established in New France. A series of Virginia codes in 1705 defined this state as applying to anyone not belonging to a Christian nation. For ten points, name this practice that began with indentured servants of African descent.	ANSWER: slavery(accept word forms)
After the winning side in this war gained naval superiority, they invaded and controlled Tarapac ́a. During  this  war’s  Battle  of  Iquique [ee-kee-kay],  theEsmeraldawas  sunk  by  theHuascar,  an  ironclad commaned by Miguel Grau. The Treaty of Ancon took one country out of this war, in which the Atacama Desert was the site of land battles. Control of saltpeter resources was a primary cause of, for ten points, what late 19th century war that Peru and Bolivia lost to Chile, named for the oceanic coast they shared?	ANSWER: War of the Pacific(acceptSaltpeterWar before it is mentioned)
This city’s suburb of Blachernae became the site of the royal palace after the rule of Manuel I. The Galata neighborhood near this city was populated by Italian traders and was the site of a namesake tower that  controlled  a  large  sea  chain.  This  city,  which  was  protected  by  the  Theodosian  Walls,  was  sacked during the Fourth Crusade and captured in 1453 by Mehmed II. The Hagia Sophia is in, for ten points, what city on the Bosporus, the capital of the Byzantine Empire?	ANSWER: Constantinople(prompt on Istanbul; do not prompt on Byzantium) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
David  Harris  founded  an  organization  called  The  Resistance  to  assist  in  this  action.  Ted  Nugent took  meth  and  urinated  on  himself  in  order  to  commit  this  action,  while  James  Fallows  committed  it by lowering his body weight. Joining the Coast Guard and moving to Canada were common methods of performing this action, which led to the arrest of Muhammad Ali. Gerald Ford issued amnesty for those who committed, for ten points, what action instead of fighting in Vietnam?	ANSWER: dodgingthedraftduring  the  Vietnam  War  (accept  equivalent  answers  that  specifically mention thedraft; prompt on partial answers, like “not fighting in Vietnam” before mentioned)
One of these events caused the wreck of theGeorge L. Newman, since the ship was unable to spot a lighthouse on Green Island. Some scientists theorize that Biela’s Comet caused one of these events in the city of Peshtigo. Another event of this type was allegedly worsened after Daniel “Peg Leg” Sullivan let a group of animals out of a barn; that event legendarily began after one of Catherine O’Leary’s cows kicked over a lantern. For ten points, name this type of disaster that devastated Chicago in 1871.	ANSWER: fires
Sculptures  found  in  temples  in  Kerala  depictlasya,  a  gentle  form  of  this  activity.  Ernest  Mackay found  a  depiction  of  a  figure  engaged  in  this  activity  who  wears  roughly  30  bangles.  A  9th  century sculpture found inside a temple in Nallur shows a deity as “Nataraja,” meaning the lord of this activity. At Mohenjo-Daro, a bronze statue of a girl engaging in this activity was discovered in 1926.Sattriyais among the classical forms of this activity in India in which the performer enacts a story. For ten points, name this performing art involving moving to the rhythm of music.	ANSWER:dancing
This ruler integrated the laws of king Ine and Offa into his own codex, which became known as the Doom Book. This man established the southern boundary of the Danelaw after forcing his enemies into the Treaty of Wedmore, and he forced Guthrum to convert to Christianity after the Battle of Edington. Wessex’s power was greatly expanded by, for ten points, what ninth century English king known as “the Great?”	ANSWER: Alfredthe Great
After Lyndon Johnson unveiled the Great Society at a speech at Ohio University, he more formally outlined  its  proposals  at  a  speech  at  this  university.  The  John  F.  Kennedy  speech  that  first  publicly outlined the Peace Corps was given at this university. The caseGrutter v. Bollingerfounded that racial preferences in this university’s law school admissions did not constitute a quota. For ten points, name this university that moved to Ann Arbor in 1837 after originally being founded in Detroit.	ANSWER: University of MichiganAnn Arbor Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
This political party was created by the Tamworth Manifesto, which aimed to distinguish it from the Duke of Wellington’s government. A leader of this party gave the Winds of Change speech in South Africa, signaling decolonization that included this party’s suppression of the Mau Mau Rebellion. A leader of this party nicknamed “Milk Snatcher” won a war over the Falklands Islands, and it allied with the DUP in 2016 under Theresa May. For ten points, name this British political party opposed by the Labour Party.	ANSWER: ConservativeParty
This man served as the second and final U.S. Secretary for Foreign Affairs. This man once joked that he  could  travel  through  the  country  by  the  lights  of  people  burning  him  in  effigy  after  he  negotiated  a treaty that provided for the removal of British troops from forts in the Northwest Territory. This author of five of the Federalist Papers is this namesake of a 1795 treaty with Great Britain. For ten points, name this first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.	ANSWER: John Jay
This city’s name derives from the Algonquin word for “trading,” since Philemon Wright founded a timber trade here that defined this city’s early economy. This city was originally divided into Upper and Lower Towns in accordance with a plan laid out by John By, who also designed the Rideau Canal that services this city. This city forms a metropolitan area with nearby Gatineau, and is the site of Parliament Hill. For ten points, name this city in Ontario, the capital of Canada.	ANSWER: Ottawa
The Ottoman Empire first conquered this modern-day country by defeating the forces of Tuman Bay II  at  the  Battle  of  Ridaniya.  A  Muslim  state  based  in  this  country  was  ruled  by  the  Bahri  and  Burji Dynasties.  Muhammad  Ali  declared  himself  Khedive  of  this  country  under  the  Ottoman  Empire,  and established  this  country’s  cotton  industry.  The  capital  of  the  Mamluk  Sultanate  was  in,  for  ten  points, what country that has been ruled from the cities of Fustat and Cairo?	ANSWER: Egypt
Description acceptable. This policy was first reported in 2002 byThe  Hilland made news again in March 2017 in an Ashley Parker profile of the former Karen Batten. This policy’s ideological precedent is the Modesto Manifesto, leading some reporters to dub it the Billy Graham Rule. Critics of this policy, which  includes  rules  regarding  alcohol,  work,  and  dining  partners,  argue  that  its  application  in  the Governor’s office in Indianapolis and the White House constitutes sexual discrimination. For ten points, identify this personal code of the Vice President.	ANSWER: Mike Pence’s rule(s) regarding behavior withwomen(accept descriptions of MikePence’s rule against diningalonewithwomenwho aren’t his wife,Pence’s rule againstworkinglatewith women, and/orPence’s rule against attending events withalcoholwithouthiswifebeing present; prompt on partial answers, such as “policy toward women” or “Mike Pence’s personal code”) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
This scientist disproved Lavoisier’s definition of acids being elements that contain oxygen. This man injured himself while working with nitrogen trichloride, which led to him hiring Michael Faraday as an assistant. This scientist experimented on himself with nitrous oxide, realizing that it could be used as an anesthetic that he nicknamed “laughing gas.” For ten points, name this English scientist who discovered elements like calcium, iodine, and chlorine.	ANSWER: Sir Humphry Davy
These places are required to tolerate, but not promote, disagreeable speech due to the caseHazelwood v.  Kuhlmeier. The speech rights of black-armband wearing people in one of these places was the subject of  the  caseTinker  v.  Des  Moines.Swann  v.  Charlotte-Mecklenburgruled  that  these  places  could  be desegregated via busing. For ten points, name these public institutions whose “separate but equal” status was banned byBrown v. Board of Education.	ANSWER:  publicschools  (accept  answers  related  to  elementary,  middle,  and/or  highschools;  do  not accept answers related to colleges or universities)
Because Richard Lawrence believed that he held this position, he attempted to assassinate president Andrew Jackson and was thereafter confined to an insane asylum. FDR held a publicized hot dog dinner with  the  holder  of  this  position  in  June,  1939.  John  Dickinson  was  the  primary  author  of  a  document addressed to the holder of this position, which urged him to reconsider tax provisions over the American colonies. For ten points, the Olive Branch Petition was addressed to the holder of what position, George III?	ANSWER: KingofEngland(accept  equivalents  such  as  theBritishmonarch;  prompt  on  partial answers such as “king” or “leader of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and (Northern) Ireland”)
A Frank Gehry-designed memorial to this man controversially plans to include a tapestry of stainless steel  cables,  which  may  depict  peaceful  imagery  of  France  or  Kansas.  Statues  planned  for  this  man’s memorial include a group inspired by a photo of this man instructing the 101st Airborne Division on June 5th, 1944. In 2017, officials celebrated the groundbreaking of a long-planned memorial for, for ten points, what Supreme Commander of Allied Forces during World War II and US President?	ANSWER: Dwight D. Eisenhower
Description acceptable. During this event, the CRS prevented citizens from crossing a river; they then built barracades instead. Daniel Cohn-Bendit [ben-deet] led one faction during this event, in which the president claimed “nobody attacks an empty palace” before fleeing the country. The Grenelle Agreements attempted  to  resolve  this  event,  which  was  preceded  by  the  Movement  of  22  March,  whose  members occupied a portion of Nanterre. Protests at the Arc de Triomphe and the Sorbonne were a part of, for ten points, what massive period of civil unrest in France in the late 1960s?	ANSWER: May1968student  protests  (or  accept  any  two  of  the  three  underlined  parts  of  “student protests against Charles deGaullein May 1968”; prompt on partial answers) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
This man liberated Bulgaria from 400 years of Ottoman rule following a successful siege of Pleven. He employed Dmitri Milyutin to open army recruitment to all social classes, and he encouraged the new zemstvosystem of local government. Loris-Melikov’s work with this leader to establish a parliament was thwarted when this leader was assassinated by the People’s Will in St. Petersburg. For ten points, name this Russian tsar who emancipated the serfs.	ANSWER: AlexanderII
Kelcy Warren serves as the CEO sponsoring this project, which was prohibited from utilizing space under  Lake  Oahe  by  the  Army  Corps  of  Engineers  in  December  2016.  Shailene  Woodley  was  arrested while protesting this project, which Energy Transfer Partners intends to run to Illinois from the Bakken fields. For ten points, name this pipeline that, controversially, is to run through the Standing Rock Indian Reservation.	ANSWER: DakotaAccessPipeline(orDAPL;  acceptBakkenPipelinebefore  Bakken  is  read; prompt  on  descriptions  of  “the  pipeline  going  through  Standing  Rock,”  etc.,  before  the  key  words  are mentioned)
This scientist is often credited with inventing the anchor escapement used in pendulum clocks. Isaac Newton’s  quote  “If  I  have  seen  further  it  is  by  standing  on  the  shoulder  of  giants”  was  probably  a  jab at this scientist’s short height. He wrote about his use of microscopes in his bookMicrographia, and his namesake law can be stated as restoring force is proportional to displacement. For ten points, name this British scientist who coined the term “cell.”	ANSWER: Robert Hooke
Description acceptable. A group advocating this action modeled its activities on the Bryce Group in Britain. Edward House drafted a plan calling for this action, which relied upon the work of the Phillimore Committee. William Borah and Henry Cabot Lodge opposed this action, citing their disapproval of Article Ten of a certain proposed covenant. For ten points, name this action, never taken despite the efforts of President Woodrow Wilson, which doomed a certain international body to irrelevance.	ANSWER: the UnitedStatesjoining theLeagueof Nations (accept equivalent descriptions; prompt on answers related to the US signing the Treaty of Versailles)
This leader’s father launched the 1970 Corrective Revolution. A revolution against this leader began after a boy was arrested for political graffiti in Daraa. To stop the Southern Front and Army of Conquest, this  Ba’athist  leader  allegedly  ordered  his  air  force  to  use  barrel  bombs  in  an  ongoing  civil  war.  This leader brokered a ceasefire with Vladimir Putin shortly after recapturing Aleppo in December 2016. For ten points, name the current president of Syria.	ANSWER: Bashar al- Assad Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
One man accomplished this feat after the widow of Zarephath accused him of bringing her sins to remembrance. Before accomplishing this feat, another man uttered “Talitha kum;” he was delayed from performing this action by a continuously bleeding woman. On a different occasion, after waiting two extra days to perform this action, the same man’s emotional response is recorded in the shortest verse in the Bible.  The  phrase  “Jesus  wept”  occurs  immediately  before  an  instance  of,  for  ten  points,  what  miracle that Jesus performed for Lazarus?	ANSWER: raisingthedead(accept descriptions of Elijah and/or Jesusresurrecting someone; accept raisingthesonofthewidowofZarephathand/orthedaughterofJairusand/orLazarus)
This man was deposed after losing at Flarchheim to Rudolph of Swabia. As a child, this man was targeted in the Kaiserswerth plot that left Anno II as regent. This man prompted a conflict by installing Guibert  of  Ravenna  as  Antipope  Clement  III.  This  man  walked  to  Canossa  Castle  barefoot  to  beg forgiveness from Gregory VII after a dispute involving the pope’s authority to appoint bishops. For ten points, name this Holy Roman Emperor embroiled in the Lay Investiture controversy.	ANSWER: HenryIV, Holy Roman Emperor (orHeinrichIV)
The  technology  of  square  set  timbering  was  developed  to  aid  in  the  extraction  of  this  commodity. Investors who held stockpiles of this commodity nicknamed a piece of harmful legislation the “Crime of ‘73.” John Sherman names an act that required the U.S. government to purchase this commodity. The Bland-Allison  Act  mandated  that  the  government  create  coins  from,  for  ten  points,  what  metal,  which was once traded at a sixteen to one ratio for gold?	ANSWER:silver
The  Negroli  family,  based  in  Milan,  was  a  key  producer  of  these  objects.  These  objects  were manufactured in Greenwich for English monarchs. Decorated versions of these objects were worn at tilts, and Japanese objects of this type were made from overlapping leather scales. These objects included the hauberk  and  gauntlets,  and  Roman  legionaries  wore  types  of  these  made  from  mail  or  plates.  For  ten points, name these protective outfits that were used in jousting and medieval warfare.	ANSWER:  suits  of armor(accept  any  specific  piece  of  armor,  such  ashauberks  orgauntlets  before they are mentioned,helmets, etc.)
During this battle, one side was saved by timely naval support from theLexingtonandTyler. Nathan Bedford Forrest led a charge along the Corinth Road in this battle, which turned with the arrival of Don Buell’s Army of the Ohio. Albert Sidney Johnston was killed early in this battle as his troops attacked the Hornet’s Nest in an attempt to push Union forces away from Pittsburgh Landing. For ten points, name this 1862 victory in Tennessee for Ulysses S. Grant.	ANSWER: Battle ofShiloh(accept Battle ofPittsburgLandingbefore mentioned) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
A defector from this country conducted the first full recording of Wagner’sRing  Cycleand led the Chicago  Symphony  from  1969  to  1991.   A  composer  from  this  nation  mocked  Shostakovich’sLeningrad Symphony  in  the  “Intermezzo  Interrotto”  of  one  work  and  collected  folk  songs  with  his  countryman, Zolt ́an Kod ́aly[koh-dye].  For ten points, George Solti and the composer of aConcerto for Orchestra, B ́ela Bart ́ok, hail from what nation, the subject of 19Rhapsodiesby Franz Liszt?	ANSWER: Hungary
Nathaniel  Morton  recorded  the  first  version  of  this  document  that  included  a  list  of  its  signers, who  agreed  to  “combine  ourselves  together  into  a  civil  body  politic.”  John  Carver  probably  wrote  this document,  which was signed by 41 “loyal subjects of our dread Sovereign Lord King James,” including William  Bradford,  to  create  the  legal  basis  for  a  community  on  Cape  Cod.   For  ten  points,  name  this document signed in 1620 to govern Plymouth Colony, signed on board the first ship to bring Pilgrims to the New World.	ANSWER: MayflowerCompact
Michael Fay’s treatment at the hands of this nation’s government caused outrage in the mid-1990s. This nation abolished trial by jury in the 1970s, and it hosts the annual Shangri-La Dialogue for world security.   The  People’s  Action  Party  of  this  nation  frequently  sued  opponents  under  the  leadership  of its recently deceased first President,  Lee Kuan Yew.  This smallest member of the Four Asian Tigers is notorious  for  its  ban  on  chewing  gum.   For  ten  points,  name  this  island-state  on  the  tip  of  the  Malay Peninsula.	ANSWER: Singapore
This  battle’s  concluding  skirmishes  in  the  Ancre  valley  were  called  off  on  account  of  the  winter. Operation Alberich saw a strategic retreat from the front lines of this battle.  An explosion at Hawthorne Ridge during this battle was filmed by Geoffrey Malins.  Ferdinand Foch and Douglas Haig failed to make significant breakthroughs in the German line during this battle during the winter of 1916.  The tank was first utilized at, for ten points, what deadly World War I battle, in which over 600,000 allied troops were killed in fighting for a French river?	ANSWER: Battle of the Somme
This  treaty’s  first  version  resolved  claims  regarding  Don  Jose  de  Garay’s  grant  to  develop  a  route across the Isthmus of Tehuantapec.  This treaty, which tried to resolve William Lane’s claim to the Mesilla Valley,  was  approved  to  obtain  land  for  a  transcontinental  railroad  south  of  the  Gila  River.   President Pierce signed, for ten points, what 1853 treaty in which America paid 10 million dollars to Mexico for a strip of land in southern New Mexico and Arizona?	ANSWER: GadsdenPurchase Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 5
This  military  organization  was  not  allowed  to  retreat  from  the  battlefield  until  all  of  its  flags  had fallen from the field.  While fighting at the Battle of Ascalon, Bernard de Tremelay led 40 members of this group to their deaths while rushing into a breach in the walls.  The Chinon Parchment documented Pope Clement  V’s  attempts  to  protect  this  group  from  dissolution,  and  Jacques  de  Molay  served  as  the  last “Grand Master” of this organization.  For ten points, name this medieval Crusading order, whose symbol was a red cross.	ANSWER: KnightsTemplar
One  member  of  this  family  took  power  after  overthrowing  Salah  Jadid.   That  man’s  supporters violently suppressed his brother’s forces in Latakia in 1999, and in 1982, that man’s military carried out the Hama massacre to suppress the Muslim Brotherhood.  Another member of this family is opposed by the al-Nusra front in a civil war that emerged from the Arab Spring.  For ten points, give this name shared by Hafez and his son, Bashar, who have both served as President of Syria.	ANSWER: al- Assad
A  memorial  to  this  event  includes  two  bronze  gates  with  three  time  inscriptions:  9:01,  9:02,  and 9:03.  That memorial to this event also contains a chair with a glass base for each victim, all of which are arranged to represent their relative locations when they died.  Charles Porter’s photography of this event shows  Baylee  Almon  being  carried  by  firefighter  Chris  Fields.   For  ten  points,  name  this  1995  terrorist attack on the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building by Terry Nichols and Timothy McVeigh.	ANSWER: OklahomaCityBombingorOKCBombing
Counteracting this phenomenon incurs shoeleather costs, and Robert Gordon’s triangle model views demand-pull as one of its three causes.  This phenomenon is plotted against unemployment in the Philips Curve.  Gerald Ford pledged to “whip” this phenomenon “now.” Unlimited printing of money in Zimbabwe and  the  Weimar  Republic  led  to  “hyper”  episodes  of  this.   The  Consumer  Price  Index  tracks,  for  ten points, what economic phenomenon, the rise in the cost of goods and services?	ANSWER: inflation
Louis  Freeland  Post  prevented  many  of  these  events,  which  were  ordered  by  a  man  called  the “Quaking  Quitter”  after  a  bomb  was  mailed  to  his  home  as  part  of  the  Galleanist  May  Day  attacks. J. Edgar Hoover assisted in organizing these events,  which threatened deportation of radicals and were widely criticized as illegal.  For ten points, name this series of arrests and raids on anarchists during the 1919-20 Red Scare, led and named for the U.S. Attorney General who ordered them.	ANSWER: PalmerRaids (prompt on descriptions of “the arrest and/or deportation of anarchists” before “deportation” is read)
At twelve years old, this person and several others were taken captive by the Hidatsa people  in  a  raid  near modern  day  Washburn.  When  this  figure  rescued  fallen  items  from  a capsized  boat  on  the  Missouri  River,  her  name  was given  to  a  tributary  of  the  Mussellshell river.  This  woman,  who  was  sold  to  trapper  Toussaint  Charbonneau  [[shahr-bah-NOH]], helped  guide  a  party  through  the  Pacific  Northwest.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Lemhi Shoshone [[shoh-SHOH-neh] woman who helped the Lewis and Clark expedition across the Louisiana Territory.	ANSWER: Sacagawea (accept Sakakawea; or Sacajawea)
After  this  event,  Musicians  United  for  Safe  Energy  presented  a  series  of  nightly concerts, collectively called “No Nukes." When this event occurred, William Scranton III was assigned  to  collect  and  report  on  information  about  it,  and  PEMA  declared  this  event  an emergency with the “potential for serious radiological consequences.” Mechanical failures caused  by  a  "loss-of-coolant  accident"  led  to, for  ten  points,  which  partial  meltdown  at  a namesake nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania?	ANSWER: Three Mile Island accident
Fray  Francisco  de  Aguilar  records  how,  along  with  Huitlacoche  [[weet-lah-KOH- cheh]], this man consumed the flesh of humans to appease his war deity. A shower of darts and stones by his countrymen led to this figure's death after his replacement by his brother, Cuitláhuac [[kweet-LAH-hwak]]. The fall of Tenochtitlan [[teh-noh-CHEET-lahn]] to Spanish forces under Hernan Cortes led to the downfall of, for ten points, which final emperor of the Aztecs?	ANSWER: Montezuma II (accept Moctezuma II; or Motecuhzomatzin)
Members of this group were encouraged to see themselves as "doctors" for a "national body" suffering from "pathogens." Members of this group were called "V-Men." This group, targeted in Operation Carthage and the Aarhus air raid, formed the RHSA's Department Four. Klaus Barbie led this group in Lyon [[leh-OHN]] while it captured prisoners under the Night and Fog Decree. Rudolf Diels was the first head of this group, though it was led for most of World War Two by Heinrich Müller [[MYOO-ler]]. For ten points, name this Nazi secret police directed by SS chief Heinrich Himmler.	ANSWER: Gestapo (accept Geheime Staatspolizei)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 6
A program named for this color in Australia supposedly helped end gambling dens in Pakapoo, later ending after the passing of the Migration Act. The Vestal Virgins wore robes of this  color,  which  nicknames  a  period  of  political  repression  by  the  Taiwanese  Kuomintang from 1947 until the 1990s. Though they criticized a movement named for this color, the Black Hundreds  were  part  of  that  movement  with  liberals  and  Kerenskyites  in  Russia.  The  Red Bolsheviks were opposed by a faction named for, for ten points, what color?	ANSWER: White (accept the Whites; accept White Terror)
In  "The  Contagiousness  of  Puerperal  Fever,"  this  man  correctly  concluded  that physicians  not  washing  their  hands  was  causing  postpartum  infections  in  their  pregnant patients.  While  corresponding  with  William  T.  G.  Morton,  this  American  coined  the  term "anesthesia."  A  poem  by  this  man  describes  a  vessel  "once  red  with  heroes'  blood,"  and contributed  to  the  decision  not  to  decommission  the  USS Constitution.  The  poem  "Old Ironsides" was written by, for ten points, which fireside poet?	ANSWER: Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. (do not accept "Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.")
Milton Banana supposedly created the beat central to a Samba style native to this city, which  sees  the  Mangueira  school  participate  in  its  yearly  parade.  Bossa  Nova  arose  in  this city,  which  witnessed  its  country's  first  men's  football  gold  medal  win  at  the  Maracanã Stadium during the first Olympics ever held in South America. The 2016 Summer Olympics occurred in, for ten points, what second-most populous Brazilian city, known for its Carnival?	ANSWER: Rio de Janeiro
Together with Shigeru Honjo, this man suppressed rebels in the February 26 Incident. This  man  earned  the  nickname  "Razor"  for  his  sharp  mind  while  serving  as  head  of  the Kwantung  Army.  This  man's  speech  on  national  radio  announcing  the  start  of  one  conflict ended  with  a  rendition  of  "Across  the  Sea."  After  the  fall  of  Saipan,  this  man  was  forced  to resign his highest office, and he was later executed for war crimes committed while in that office. For ten points, name this prime minister of Japan during most of World War Two.	ANSWER: Hideki Tojo (or Tojo Hideki)
John Boehner [[BAY-ner]] attempted to draw this man into being the running mate of Bob  Dole  in  the  1996 election,  resulting  in  him  saying,  "the  possibility  is  too  remote  to comment  upon,  given  my  position."  This  man  interpreted  the  term  "militia"  in  the  Second Amendment  to  mean  "a  body  of  citizens"  in  his  majority  decision  in District  of  Columbia  v. Heller. The media widely reported on this Reagan nominee's shared friendship with his left leaning  colleague,  Ruth  Bader  Ginsburg.  For  ten  points,  name  this originalist  and  textualist U.S. Supreme Court judge who died in 2016.	ANSWER: Antonin Scalia (or Anton Gregory Scalia)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 6
Due  to  his  father's  exhausting  work  on  calculating  taxes,  this  scientist  developed  a working calculator at age nineteen, though it was primarily used as a toy for aristocrats. This man attacked casuistry [[KAZ-yoo-is-tree]] in a series of letters that were ordered to be burnt by King Louis XIV [[the Fourteenth]], and were eventually published as the Provincial Letters. Developing a notable "Wager" over the possibility of God's existence, for ten points, who was this French polymath of the early seventeenth century?	ANSWER: Blaise Pascal (accept Pascal's Wager)   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 6
One leader of this kingdom was called the “mute king,” and a curse believed to be cast on the ruling dynasty of this kingdom supposedly explains why alternating generations of its Wadiyar Dynasty never had children. The first iron-cased rockets were used by this kingdom, leading the British to reverse-engineer the Congreve Rocket. This kingdom’s ruler Hyder Ali fought the Maratha Confederacy and the British East India Company. Tipu Sultan ruled, for ten points, what kingdom in southern India?	ANSWER: Kingdom of Mysore
Leo  VI  the  Wise  claimed  to  have  invented  a  hand  siphon  for  use  with  this  material,  and  dromon galleys had mounted siphons on their prow to launch this weapon. Scientists have doubted phosphine’s potential to be used in this weapon, as its reaction with water isn’t violent enough. Naphtha, quicklime, and sulfur are among the various candidates for the possible ingredients of, for ten points, what seemingly magic  incendiary  weapon  that  was  used  by  the  Byzantines  until  knowledge  of  its  production  was  lost around the 12th century?	ANSWER: Greekfire(prompt on “fire;” prompt on descriptions of “fire that burns on water”)
This man declared that “the road to holiness necessarily passes through the world of action” in his memoirs, titled Markings. The Soviet Union attempted to unseat this man with a three-person “troika” with  veto  power.  Union  Miniere  may  have  killed  this  man,  whose  DC-6  was  shot  down  as  he  flew  for peace  talks  with  Moise  Tshombe’s  Katangese  troops.  He  was  posthumously  awarded  the  Nobel  Peace Prize  for  his  work  in  the  Congo  Crisis.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  Swedish  politician,  the  second  UN Secretary-General.	ANSWER: Dag Hammarskjold
Crime boss Charles Binaggio operated in this state, hoping to take over local politics to allow the mob to grow. Racially restrictive housing contracts were found to be illegal in a case that arose from this state,Shelley v. Kramer. Thomas Pendergast ran a political machine in this state, leading Harry Truman to be known as “the Senator from Pendergast.” For ten points, name this state that entered the Union with Maine as part of a namesake 1820 compromise.	ANSWER: Missouri
The shipPrimrosewas attacked in this island chain, which was once colonized by Austria as Theresia. Sher Ali Afridi stabbed the 6th Lord Mayo to death in these islands, where a prison known as the “black waters”  was  used  to  house  British  political  prisoners.  The  Cellular  Jail  was  in  this  island  chain,  where missionary  John  Allen  Chau  was  killed  by  the  Sentinelese  in  2018.  Port  Blair  is  the  capital  of,  for  ten points,  what  island  chain  west  of  Myanmar  whose  indigenous  people  are  some  of  the  last  uncontacted people in the world?	ANSWER: AndamanIslands  (acceptAndamanandNicobarislands;  do  not  accept  or  prompt  on North Sentinel Island) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
Archaeologist  John  Marshall  claims  that  the  Pashupati  seal  depicts  a  “proto”  version  of  this  god surrounded by animals. This god’s name originally was applied as an epithet to the Vedic god Rudra, with whom this god was syncretized. This god is depicted with a third eye, which he used to destroy the love god Kama. Parvati is the wife of, for ten points, what Hindu destroyer god who makes up the Trimurti with Vishnu and Brahma?	ANSWER: Shiva(orSiva)
This man gained the support ofCenturymagazine editor Robert Johnson after the two of them took a trip to Tuolumne[too-AWL-um-nee] Meadows. This man worked with Henry Senger to form a resistance group  to  the  Hetch  Hetchy  Dam.  A  famous  photograph  of  this  man  shows  him  standing  atop  Glacier Point with Theodore Roosevelt. In 1906, this man successfully campaigned for Yosemite to be put under federal control. For ten points, name this Scottish-American naturalist who founded the Sierra Club.	ANSWER: JohnMuir
This ruler debated Otanes and Megazubus over different governmental systems until he was chosen to be king because his slave Oebares made his horse neigh first at sunrise. This ruler overthrew Bardiya, who was possibly impersonated by Gaumata. Nebuchadnezzar III fought a ruler of this name, who created the first satrapies from a tax system inherited by Cyrus the Great. The Behistun Inscription was created by, for ten points, what ruler who led the first Persian invasion of Greece?	ANSWER: DariustheGreat(acceptDariusI; prompt on Darius)
As  a  result  of  a  dispute  with  Peter  Ludvig  Moller,  this  thinker  was  harassed  on  the  streets  of  his hometown in what became known as the Corsair Affair. In one book, this thinker claimed that only by “virtue of the absurd” were movements of faith possible. This thinker used the teleological suspension of the ethical to justify Abraham’s sacrifice of Isaac. For ten points, name this Danish thinker who discussed the “leap of faith” and wroteFear and Trembling.	ANSWER: Soren Kierkegaard
The  perpetrators  of  this  event  avoided  jail  after  a  report  sent  by  Aaron  Briggs  was  not  believed by Governor Joseph Wanton. Prior to this event, William Dudingston sparked anger by rerouting a rum shipment  from  theFortune.  The  target  of  this  event  had  run  aground  while  chasing  theHannahnear Warwick, allowing John Brown and Abraham Whipple to burn it down. For ten points, name this early act of colonial violence, a 1772 attack on a British vessel in Rhode Island.	ANSWER:GaspeeAffair Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
This  country  was  saved  by  the  arrival  of  Anton  von  L’Estocq’s  forces  during  a  battle  in  which 11,000 enemy cavalry charged through a heavy snowstorm. This country’s troops crossed the Alle River in an attempt to defeat Jean Lannes before aid arrived; however, that assault backfired on the Count of Bennigsen, and this country was forced to sign the Treaty of Tilsit. The loser at the Battles of Eylau and Friedland was, for ten points, what country whose refusal to follow the Continental System prompted a French invasion in 1812?	ANSWER: Russian Empire
This state’s Camp Jackson riot and subsequent massacre was triggered by Nathaniel Lyon’s arrest of the state militia. That massacre led to the brief Price-Harney Truce between the federal government and this state’s government, which ultimately collapsed at the Battle of Wilson’s Creek near Springfield. Many people from this state fought as guerrilla bushwhackers, often against Jayhawkers in a neighboring state. For ten points, name this state in the Civil War whose “Border Ruffians” rushed in to fight in “Bleeding Kansas.”	ANSWER: Missouri
A thinker from this philosophical movement thought that “What’s a mistake but a kind of take?” was one of the secrets of the universe after inhaling too much nitrous oxide. The author ofMaking It Explicit, Robert Brandom, is considered a revivalist of this philosophical school with his teacher, Richard Rorty. A book titled for this philosophical school is subtitled “A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking.” For ten points, name this American philosophical movement that included C.S. Peirce [PURSE], John Dewey, and William James.	ANSWER: pragmatism
This  dynasty  fled  south  after  a  war  where  Fire  Lances  used  at  the  Battle  of  De’an.  This  dynasty used Tiger Cave Kilns to create Guan Ware instead of Ru Ware ceramics. Following the short-lived Qingli reforms, this dynasty introduced the New Policies under reformer Wang Anshi, who was opposed by Sima Guang.  After  defeating  the  Liao,  the  Jurchen  Jin  Dynasty  invaded  this  dynasty  forcing  it  to  move  its capital from Kaifeng to Hangzhou. For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty that fell after the invasion of the Yuan under Kublai Khan.	ANSWER: SongDynasty
A very early example of this art form,Seelewig, was produced in Nuremberg in 1644. The earliest examples of this form include Jacopo Peri’sDafneand the oldest one still performed,The Coronation of Poppeaby Claudio Monteverdi. Rival types of this art form in the 18th century includedseriaandbuffa; examples of the latter includeThe Barber of Seville. A librettist writes the words for, for ten points, what art form that combines theatrical staging and, usually, classical music?	ANSWER: opera(prompt on music; prompt on theater) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
Following  his  1978  death,  this  man’s  wife  Muriel  took  over  his  Senate  seat.  At  a  1948  national convention,  this  man  stated  that  “The  time  has  arrived  for  the  Democratic  Party  to  [...]  walk  forth- rightfully  into  the  bright  sunshine  of  human  rights.”  This  man  succeeded  Eugene  McCarthy  as  senator from  Minnesota  after  being  nominated  for  President  at  a  convention  where  riots  broke  out  in  Chicago. For ten points, name this Democratic politician who lost the 1968 election to Richard Nixon.	ANSWER: Hubert Horatio Humphrey, Jr.
One of this religion’s scriptures is called the Holy Piby. This religion celebrates a 1966 plane landing at Palisadoes Airport with its Grounation Day holiday. This religion is divided into denominations like Nyahbinghi called “Mansions” and keeps a diet caled Ital[EYE-tall]. For ten points, name this religion which  regards  Haile  Selassie  as  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  a  Jamaican  movement  famous  for  its practitioners’ dreadlocks and cannabis use.	ANSWER:Rastafarianism (accept word forms, includingRastafari))
A Bible used in this event is maintained by St. John’s Lodge. The central figure of this event arrived by barge to Murray’s Wharf and, after it, was forced to walk to his residence at Franklin House since too many  people  were  crowding  the  streets.  Robert  Livingston  administered  an  oath  to  the  subject  of  this event, who allegedly added the words “so help me God” at the end. This event included a speech given outside of Federal Hall in New York City. For ten points, name this April 30, 1789 event that marked the start of the first Presidency.	ANSWER: inaugurationof GeorgeWashington(prompt on partial answers)
This man agreed to a truce with England in the Treaty of Picquigny, allowing him to focus his forces against the League of the Public Weal. This man revolted against his father in the failed Praguerie and subsequently fled to Philip the Good’s court. After his greatest foe was slain at Nancy, this ruler annexed Picardy.  The  death  of  Charles  the  Bold  allowed  this  man  to  take  control  of  Burgundy.  For  ten  points, name this French monarch whose diplomatic cunning earned him his nickname.	ANSWER: LouisXI(acceptLouisthePrudentorLouisthe (Universal)Spider; prompt on Louis)
A politician from this state briefly ran for President in 2015 and condemned “immigration without assimilation” as “invasion.” Another politician from this state lost his 2015 bid for governor after a scandal involving him soliciting prostitutes; that man was David Vitter, who lost to a man who is now the only Democratic governor in the Deep South. For ten points, name this state that has been governed by John Bel Edwards, Bobby Jindal, and Kathleen Blanco, who served during Hurricane Katrina.	ANSWER: Louisiana Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
An expedition from this colony used theGood  Hopein a futile expedition to reclaim a fur trading post on the Penobscot River. Much of the congregation of John Robinson immigrated to this colony from Leiden in the Netherlands. Myles Standish was a military leader of this colony, which was governed for nearly  30  years  by  William  Bradford.  Colonists  from  theMayflowerestablished,  for  ten  points,  what colony near a namesake rock in Massachusetts?	ANSWER: PlymouthColony
Description acceptable. Thomas Aquinas cited Genesis 1:28[chapter1,verse28] as Biblical justification for this general action, so long as it was used as a means to divine happiness. The “spoilage” and “enough and  as  good”  provisions  limit  the  right  to  this  practice,  according  to  John  Locke,  who  stated  that  this practice  became  legitimate  through  the  mixing  of  labor.  Rousseau’sDiscourse  on  Inequalityblames  all the  world’s  “crimes,  wars,  and  murders”  on  this  practice,  which  takes  place  through  enclosure  of  the commons. For ten points, name this practice that Locke sought to protect alongside life and liberty.	ANSWER: owning   privateproperty(accept   equivalents;   accept   descriptions   relating   tobuying property; acceptland,goods,things, etc. as substitutes for property; accept thepursuitofproperty and similar phrases after “spoilage” is read; prompt on partial answers)
One ruler of this country, Fasilides, established a new capital at the city of Gondar. The Jesuit Pedro P ́aez wrote a two volume history of this country, where the Oromo people migrated from south to north in the 16th century. This country is home to churches cut into the rock near the town of Lalibela. This country  was  ruled  by  members  of  the  Solomonic  Dynasty,  like  Zara  Yaqob.  For  ten  points,  name  this modern African country whose land was once ruled by the Kingdom of Axum on the Horn of Africa.	ANSWER: Ethiopia
Darcus  Howe  was  a  civil  rights  leader  in  this  country,  where  a  race  riot  that  inspired  the  Eddy Grant song “Electric Avenue” took place in Brixton. In 1968, a politician from this country delivered the controversial anti-immigration speech “Rivers of Blood.” In addition to Enoch Powell, another racist in this country was responsible for the murder of a member of its parliament, Jo Cox, in 2017. For ten points, name this European country that committed racial discrimination in Caribbean colonies like Jamaica and Barbados.	ANSWER: UnitedKingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  (accept  GreatBritain;  accept England)
In  1886,  Herman  Presser  and  his  group  Lehr  und  Wehr  Verein  cited  this  amendment  to  challenge an Illinois law. This amendment’s jurisprudence favored the collective rights interpretation established in US v. Milleruntil the Roberts Court recently applied the individual rights doctrine inDC v. Hellerand McDonald v. Chicago. For ten points, name this amendment that mentions a “well-regulated militia” and guarantees the right to bear arms.	ANSWER: 2nd Amendment to the U.S. Constitution Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
This foodstuff was first made from a plant called teosinte[tay-oh-sin-tay]. In 1885, Charles Cretors invented a machine to make this foodstuff, which he displayed at the 1893 Chicago World’s Fair. During World War II, sugar rations led to the tripling in consumption of this good, which the Redenbacher family started selling during the Great Depression. For ten points, name this food, a sweetened variety of which is found with peanuts in Cracker Jack, and which is the highest-selling food in American movie theaters.	ANSWER: popcorn(prompt on corn)
This  President  introduced  the  ISF  solidarity  tax  on  wealth  after  running  on  the  110  Propositions platform. This man announced his country would give grants, not loans, to African nations in a speech at La Baule describing a “south wind” of democratization. This President, whose last meal was the illegal Ortolan bird, sunk the Greenpeace shipRainbow  Warriorand was forced to “cohabitate” with his rival Jacques Chirac. For ten points, name this first socialist President of France.	ANSWER: Fran ̧coisMitterand
A primary source about life in this empire is provided by the letters of Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. The  murdered  miniaturist  Elegant  Effendi  works  under  this  empire  in  Orhan  Pamuk’s  novelMy  Name is Red. Cervantes’s left hand was badly maimed while fighting against this empire as part of the Spanish contingent at the Battle of Lepanto. For ten points, name this empire where authors were patronized by nobles in 19th century Bursa and Istanbul.	ANSWER: OttomanEmpire
Thirty-six  members  of  this  country’s  militia  were  killed  in  the  Dawson  massacre  by  Adrian  Woll’s troops.  At  an  inauguration  ceremony  in  this  country,  the  outgoing  president  spoke  for  three  hours,  so Algernon  Thompson  had  to  read  the  inaugural  speech  for  the  incoming  president,  Mirabeau  Lamar.  In this country, the “regulators” and “moderators” feuded over land rights and cattle rustling. For ten points, name this country whose first presidential election, held in 1836, was contested by Stephen Austin and Sam Houston.	ANSWER: Republic of Texas
In  this  city,  the  Zelene  Beretke  and  Patriotic  League  became  infamous  for  firing  on  ambulances and UN employees. A massacre took place in the Markale market in this city, where Admira Ismic and Bosko Brkic became known as “Romeo and Juliet” after they were gunned down trying to cross Vrbanja [vir-bahn-yah]  bridge.  This  city,  the  site  of  “Sniper  Alley,”  was  besieged  until  1996,  after  the  signing of  the  Dayton  Agreement.  Republica  Srpska  besieged,  for  ten  points,  what  capital  city  of  Bosnia  and Herzegovina?	ANSWER: Sarajevo Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
A shipment of arms to this group aboard theEksundwas intercepted by the French and discovered to have been sent by Muammar Gaddafi. Bobby Sands died in a hunger strike protesting the prison rights afforded  to  members  of  this  group,  which  began  to  disarm  after  Sinn  Fein[shinfayn]  signed  the  Good Friday  Accords  with  Tony  Blair.  For  ten  points,  name  this  paramilitary  group  that  split  off  from  an “Official” nonviolent group shortly after “The Troubles” began in Ireland.	ANSWER: ProvisionalIrishRepublicanArmy(orPIRA; prompt on Irish Republican Army or IRA alone)
This  event’s  end  was  hastened  by  the  intervention  of  George  Snowden’s  militia,  despite  William McCleary’s  numerous  attempts  at  peaceful  negotiation.  Alexander  Berkman’s  attempt  to  assassinate  a participant in this event brought it into the national spotlight. A group attempting to stop this event was caught while traveling in barges up the Ohio River. Pinkerton agents working for Henry Clay Frick failed to break, for ten points, what 1892 strike of Pennsylvania steelworkers at a Carnegie plant?	ANSWER: HomesteadSteel strike
This man wrote an analysis of the German psyche after World War II titledAnti-Semite and Jew. This  first  editor  of  the  journalModern Timespopularized  the  phrase  “existence  precedes  essence”  in hisExistentialism and Humanism,  which  rejected  deterministic  excuses  for  behavior.  This  philosopher popularized  the  idea  that  there  are  “two  modes  of  consciousness,”  and  that  “bad  faith”  forces  human beings  to  adopt  false  values,  in  hisBeing and Nothingness.  For  ten  points,  name  this  French  post-war philosopher and Nobel Laureate who was married to Simone de Beauvoir.	ANSWER: Jean-Paul Sartre
A member of this family was targeted by the Soviet-backed Yanan Faction in the “Second Arduous March.” This family is honored on the “Day of the Sun.” A member of this family instituted the “Juche” [joo-chay] policy of self-reliance and took the title of “Eternal President,” while another member of this family allegedly ordered a hacking of Sony after he was unfavorably depicted inThe Interview.Il-Sung, Jong-Il, and Jong-Un are members of, for ten points, what family that rules North Korea?	ANSWER: Kimfamily
This scientist discovered that stereoisomers of tartaric acid rotate polarized light in opposite directions. He  saved  the  silk  industry  in  his  country  by  determining  that  silkworms  were  dying  from  an  infectious disease called flacherie. This scientist was able to save Joseph Meister from a dog bite due to his research into  a  vaccine  for  rabies.  For  ten  points,  name  this  French  scientist  whose  namesake  process  removes harmful microorganisms from milk.	ANSWER: Louis Pasteur Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
This  man  wrote  that  “If  [...]  bad  men  can  be  got  rid  of  only  by  killing,  then  the  killing  must  be done,” leading some to claim he was an accessory to the murder of William McKinley. This man’s ranch on an “Enchanted Hill” in San Simeon, California, includes a massive castle open to public tours. This mogul inspired Charles Foster Kane in Orson Welles’ 1941 filmCitizen Kane. For ten points, name this early 20th century American newspaper publisher whoseNew York Journalrivaled theNew York World of Joseph Pulitzer.	ANSWER: William Randolph Hearst
Major cities in this country were seized by Yahya Khan’s troops during Operation Searchlight in an attempt to prevent the Awami League from taking power. In 1971, George Harrison organized the world’s first benefit concert to support this country, which was suffering a genocide during its war of independence from Pakistan. For ten points, name this country, now an independent country with capital Dhaka.	ANSWER:Bangladesh(accept Concert forBangladesh; prompt on East Pakistan)
As a result of this treaty, Portugal regained Colonia do Sacramento in Uruguay. This treaty forced North American tribes formerly loyal to France to open trade with all nations. Britain increased its hold on the slave market when it was given theasiento, along with Gibraltar, in this treaty. Philip, duke of Anjou, renounced his claim to the French throne as a result of, for ten points, what treaty that ended the War of the Spanish Succession?	ANSWER: Treaty of Utrecht
This river was the subject of the Pick-Sloan plan, which sought to build the Garrison and Fort Peck Dams. Fort Mandan was built along the banks of this river as a wintering spot for a 1804-1805 expedition; that expedition, led by Lewis and Clark, traversed the entire length of this river, which flows past Omaha and Kansas City. For ten points, name this longest tributary of the Mississippi River, which joins it north of St. Louis.	ANSWER: MissouriRiver
The instigators of this battle intended to start the assault shortly after the delivery of the Fourteen Part  Message.  A  pilot  who  crash  landed  during  this  battle  received  support  and  animosity  from  the local  populace  in  the  Niihau  Incident.  Wheeler  Air  Field  was  repeatedly  targeted  in  this  battle,  which controversially did not include a third wave of striking aircraft. For ten points, name this 1941 battle in which the USSArizonawas sunk.	ANSWER: Battle ofPearlHarbor Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
This  state’s  Pingree  Associates  established  America’s  largest  conservation  easement  around  its Allagash River in 2001.  This state’s eastern boundary is partially formed by the St.  Croix River, which was surveyed as part of Jay’s Treaty.  One country hid the Mitchell Map during a dispute over this state’s northern  border,  which  was  established  along  the  St.   John’s  River.   The  Aroostook  War  was  fought between New Brunswick and, for ten points, what state with capital Augusta?	ANSWER: Maine
With  his  brother  Manuel,  this  man  set  up  a  “wet  line”  to  prevent  immigration  and  campaigned against the bracero program.  He joined forces with the Filipino-dominated AWOC in a campaign where longshoremen  refused  to  load  grapes  from  Delano,  California.   With  Dolores  Huerta,  he  co-founded  an organization  whose  slogan  was  “Si,  se  puede,” [pway-day]  or  “Yes  we  can.”  The  United  Farm  Workers were led by, for ten points, what Mexican-American labor activist?	ANSWER: Cesar Estrada Chavez
One supporter of these people launched the failed Atterbury Plot.  An uprising of these people is the subject  of  the  song  “Johnny  Cope.”  These  people  launched  the  failed  “Forty-Five”  uprising  which  was defeated at the Battle of Culloden.  These people believed in the legitimacy of Bonnie Prince Charlie to the throne.  For ten points, name these people who claimed that the House of Stuart were the legitimate heirs to the British throne.	ANSWER: Jacobites
Prior  to  his  career  as  a  politician,  this  man  owned  a  firefighting  business  notorious  for  letting properties  burn  down  so  that  this  man  could  buy  the  land.   He  punished  Mummius  during  the  Third Servile War by renewing the practice of decimation.  After the Battle of Carrhae, the Parthians killed this man by pouring molten gold down his throat.  For ten points, name this legendarily rich Roman leader, a member of the First Triumvirate with Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great.	ANSWER: Marcus Licinius Crassus
Harry Trask captured three iconic photographs of Jock Semple accosting Katherine Switzer during one  of  these  events,  which  Switzer  entered  under  her  initials.   The  testimony  of  John  Faulkner  helped discover Rosie Ruiz’s fraudulent claims about one of these sporting events.  In 2012, one of these events was canceled in the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy.  The traditional last event of the Summer Olympics is, for ten points, what sporting event, which was the site of a 2013 bombing in Boston?	ANSWER: marathon Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 6
This work ends by saying “instead of gazing at each other with suspicious or doubtful curiosity, let each of us hold out [...]  the hearty hand of friendship,” before calling “Let the names of Whig and Tory be extinct.” Benajmin Rush edited this work, whose final section calculates the value of the British navy, noting America’s natural resources give it the potential to rival it.  The absurdity of an island ruling over a continent is noted by, for ten points, what 1776 pro-revolution pamphlet by Thomas Paine?	ANSWER: CommonSense
War broke out between this country and its eastern neighbour after the death of Inspector Grosgurin. Guy  Tachard  was  sent  by  Louis  XIV  to  become  ambassador  of  this  modern  day  country.   This  non- European country underwent a 1688 revolution, which overthrew the pro-foreign King Narai.  This modern day country, once home to the Ayutthaya Kingdom, is now led by the Chakri Dynasty’s King Rama IX. For ten points, name this country formerly known as Siam, whose capital is Bangkok.	ANSWER:Thailand
The  body  of  Ulric  Dahlgren  was  discovered  in  this  city  with  an  apparent  order  to  burn  it  down. Dozens of POWs escaped this city in the Libby prison break.  Joseph Reid Anderson protected this city’s Tredegar  Iron  Works  from  arson;  that  site  is  now  home  to  a  controversial  statue  of  Tad  and  Abraham Lincoln, who toured this city after that “Evacuation Fire.” Shortly after the fall of Petersburg, Jefferson Davis fled from, for ten points, what Virginia city, the capital of the Confederacy?	ANSWER: Richmond
The  execution  of  Mishaal,  a  member  of  this  family,  is  depicted  in  the  documentaryDeath  of  a Princess.  The Battle of Sabila was a victory for one ruler from this house,  leading to the defeat of the Ikhwan revolt.  The economic well-being of this house is highly linked to the success of ARAMCO. The current  head  of  this  family,  which  supports  the  Wahhabi  mission,  became  King  in  January  2015  after the death of his brother, Abdullah, in Riyadh.  For ten points, name this Arab royal family led by King Salman, that rules over Saudi Arabia.	ANSWER: House of Saud
Baron  d’Holbach’sThe  System  of  Naturerefuted  this  concept,  which  was  advocated  for  in  a discussion of infinite gains and avoiding infinite losses that appeared inPens ́ees [pawn-say].  Maximilian Robespierre led a group that supported this concept but believed the subject was passive:  the Cult of the Supreme Being.  Blaise Pascal wagered in favor of, for ten points, what theological concept concerning the presence of higher beings, which is opposed by atheists?	ANSWER: existenceofgod(s) (accept descriptions; do not accept “non-existence of god(s)”)
19th century scholar Franz Mone [[MOH-nuh]] suggested the site of this battle was also  the  place  where  the  hero  of  the Song  of  the  Nibelung,  Sigurd,  slew  the  dragon  Fafnir. Following  this  battle,  a  chieftain  of  the  Cherusci  [[keh-ROO-skee]]  sent  the  head  of  his opponent  to  the  Marcomanni  to  secure  an  alliance.  At  Kalkriese  Hill,  Germanic  chieftain Arminius ambushed the forces of Varus, beginning this battle. Emperor Augustus cried "Give me back my Legions" following, for ten points, which devastating Roman defeat in the first century?	ANSWER: Battle of the Teutoburg Forest (or die Schlacht im Teutoburger Wald; prompt on the "Varian Disaster" before "Varus")
The Cataldo Mission, constructed by the Jesuit missionary Pierre-Jean De Smet, is the oldest  building  in  this  U.S.  state.  In  1905,  Frank  Steunenberg  [[stew-NEHN-burg]],  former governor of this state, was assassinated by a disgruntled member of the Western Federation of Miners. In 1992, this state was the site of a standoff between the government and white separatist  Randy  Weaver  at  the  Ruby  Ridge  compound,  situated  near  this  state's  Canadian and  Washington  border. For  ten  points,  name  this  state  which,  during  the Civil  War,  saw  a chaotic transfer of its capital from Lewiston to Boise.	ANSWER: Idaho
This  country  secured  its  independence  in  the  aftermath  of  Operation  Storm,  which included  the  retaking of Knin  and  the expulsion  of  many  Orthodox  Christians  from  Krajina [[krah-YEE-nah]]. During World War Two, a Nazi puppet state in this country was dominated by the Ustaše [[ooh-STAH-sheh]].  This  country  sought  independence  from  Hungary  and unification  of  its  "Triune  Kingdom"  which  included  Slavonia  and  the  coastal  Kingdom  of Dalmatia.  For  ten  points,  name  this  former  Habsburg  territory  and  constituent  country  of Yugoslavia, governed from Zagreb.	ANSWER: Republic of Croatia (or Republika Hrvatska)
Russian  lieutenant  Adam  Laxman  landed  on  this  island  to  forcibly  return  a  pair  of castaways. Shakushain’s revolt on this island was put down by the Matsumae clan, which was tasked with defending part of it. This island was the location of a short-lived separatist state called  the  Republic  of  Ezo,  which  opposed  the  Meiji  government.  In  the  closing  weeks  of World War Two, the city of Muroran was bombarded by American ships off the coast of, for ten points, what Japanese island, governed from Sapporo?	ANSWER: Hokkaido (accept Ezo before mentioned)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 7
The  lack  of  convictions  surrounding  this  figure's  death  led  to  its  site  being  dubbed "The  Freestate  of  Tallahatchie" by  the Chicago  Defender.  Married  white  woman  Carolyn Bryant  likely  lied  that  this  Black  teenager  whistled  at  her.  This  figure  names  a  2008  "Act" sponsored by John Lewis which aimed to attempt to solve cold cases of violence against Black victims prior to the 1970s. A mid-1950s mob in Mississippi murdered, for ten points, which 14 year old Black teen, whose death galvanized the Civil Rights movement?	ANSWER: Emmett Till (or Emmett Louis Till)
The Karsakpay inscription describes how this leader led an army of 200,000 men to subjugate the khan of the Golden Horde, Tokhtamysh [[tohk-tah-MEESH]]. This man captured Ottoman sultan Bayezid the Thunderbolt during the Battle of Ankara. This Turko-Mongolic leader  was  the  direct  ancestor  of  all  the  Mughal  emperors. For  ten  points,  name  this conqueror  whose  name  reflects  the  serious  injuries  he  suffered  early  in  life  and  who established his capital at Samarkand.	ANSWER: Tamerlane (accept Timur the Lame, accept Amir Timur; or Timūr Gurkānī)
This tribe negotiated with Maryland Loyalist leader William Bowles, who successfully convinced them to reinforce the British fort in Pensacola during the Revolutionary War. The Seminole  were  originally  from  this  non-Florida  tribe,  who  migrated  to  Florida  in  the  18th century and mixed with local tribes like the Calusa. The militant faction of this tribe, the Red Sticks,  were  defeated  by  Andrew  Jackson  at  Horseshoe  Bend.  For  ten  points,  name  this member of the "Five Civilized Tribes" of the Southeastern U.S., also known as the Muscogee.	ANSWER: Creek (accept Muscogee before mentioned; accept Red Stick Creek before mentioned)
This site's monk's cell had a Buddhist style stupa added over a thousand years after its abandonment by inhabitants of the Sindhu Kingdom. A layer of bitumen coated this city's "Great  Bath,"  the  earliest  public  water  tank  in  recorded  human  history,  likely  used  for religious purposes due to its proximity to the "College of Priests." One of the largest sites of the  Harappan  Civilization  was,  for  ten  points,  which  city  in  modern  Pakistan  whose  name translates to "Mound of the Dead"?	ANSWER: Mohenjo-Daro (do not accept "Harappa")
Five miles outside of this city, the first major Protestant victory of the Thirty Years' War occurred at the Battle of Breitenfeld by troops led by Gustavus Adolphus. Nazi Germany modified  this  city's  name  to  reference  a  "Trade  Fair"  which  ran  unimpeded  here  since medieval times. The dissolution of the Confederation of the Rhine followed Napoleon's defeat at  an  1813  battle  named  for  this  city,  the  largest  fought  during  the  19th  century.  The Monument to the Battle of the Nations is in, for ten points, which city in Saxony, sixty miles from Dresden?	ANSWER: Leipzig (accept Reichsmessestadt Leipzig; accept Battle of Leipzig)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 7
Bernard de Montfaucon [[mont-foh-KOHN]] brought this artwork to the attention of of Europe when he hired Antoine Benoit [[beh-NWAH]] to copy it in its entirety. This artwork, which includes an early depiction of Halley's Comet, depicts Count Guy of Ponthieu [[pohn- TOO]]  holding  an  English  king  captive  for  ransom.  During  the  early  days  of  the  French Revolution, this artwork was seized by the Directory to be used to cover the tops of military wagons.  Harold  Godwinson  is  shown  taking  an  arrow  in  the  eye  in,  for  ten  points,  which medieval "Tapestry" depicting the Battle of Hastings?	ANSWER: Bayeaux [[bah-"YOU"]] Tapestry   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 7
Ellsworth  Bunker  and  R ́omulo  Betancourt  helped  negotiate  the  ownership  of  this  structure,  a development  that  Strom  Thurmond  responded  to  by  noting  “we  bought  it;  we  paid  for  it;  it  is  ours.” Chief Sanitary Officer William Gorgas helped construct this structure, whose construction was advised by George Washington Goethals. The Torrijos-Carter[torr-HEE-yohs] Treaties transferred control of, for ten points, what waterway that connects the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean?	ANSWER: PanamaCanal
Domenico Trezzini created a grid of canals for this city, which was constructed under Jean-Baptiste Alexandre le Blond. Fyodor Trepov flogged a political prisoner in this city, causing Vera Zasulich to shoot him.  Dmitri  Karakazov  failed  to  kill  a  ruler  in  this  city  who  was  ultimately  killed  here  by  a  bomb  in 1881. In this city’s Senate Square, rebels declared support for Grand Duke Constantine in the Decembrist Revolt. Alexander II was assassinated in, for ten points, what northern Russian city that was renamed for Lenin?	ANSWER: SaintPetersburg(acceptPetrograd; prompt on “Leningrad”)
This conflict’s pivotal siege of Mahenge led the losing side to discard their castor oil and flee. During this conflict, the losing side rebeled against Carl Peters on the advice of Hongo, a snake spirit. The losers of this conflict joined Bokero after they were forced to produce cotton for export, leading to a devastating famine. For ten points, name this 1905 rebellion in German East Africa named for a medicine that was said to turn German bullets into water.	ANSWER: MajiMajiRebellion
In a novel written in this language, an old man collects banned books obtained while working as a paper crusher. In another novel written in this language, a professor is robbed after protesting in Thailand and a female dog named after a Tolstoy novel is given as a gift to Tereza. After writingThe Garden Party, an  author  in  this  language  co-founded  Charter  77  and  gained  political  power  in  the  Velvet  Revolution. For ten points, name this language used by Bohumil Hrabal, Milan Kundera, and Vaclav Havel.	ANSWER: Czech
An ally of this man named George Dew sacked Guayaquil, Ecuador, and they spent much of 1691 harassing a French fort on the Piscataqua River. This Scotsman, who led theAdventure Galley, was given a letter of marque from William III to curb piracy in the southern Indian Ocean. After this man captured theQuedagh Merchantin 1698, the English feared retribution in India and branded him a pirate. For ten points, name this captain of theBlessed William, the only pirate known to have actually buried treasure.	ANSWER: William Kidd Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
A leader of this number became the final emperor of the Angelos dynasty and co-ruled during the second reign of his father, Isaac II Angelos. Lysippos may have sculpted a work consisting of this many bronze horses that were looted by Venetians and installed at the Basilica of Saint Mark; the Venetians acquired those horses during the 1204 sack of Constantinople, which ended the crusade of this number. For ten points, give this number of the crusade that was led by Enrico Dandolo.	ANSWER: four(accept AlexiosIVAngelos; accept4bronze horses of Saint Mark; accept4th Crusade)
After  this  man  had  his  works  rejected  from  theExposition Universalle,  he  opened  the  makeshift “Pavilion  of  Realism”  to  display  several  paintings,  includingThe Artist’s Studioand  a  massive  canvas depicting a funeral in his hometown. During the firebombing of Dresden in World War II, a work by this man depicting two men breaking rocks was destroyed. For ten points, name this French artist ofBurial at OrnansandThe Stone Breakers.	ANSWER: GustaveCourbet
This man believed he had killed Bernard “Lotsapoppa” Crowe after he saw a news report about a dead Black Panther. This resident of the Spahn Movie Ranch was taught the guitar by Alvin “Creepy” Karpis, and he sent Bobby Beausoleil to kill music teacher Gary Hinman. Lynette “Squeaky” Fromme, a failed assassin of Gerald Ford, was a follower of this man, whose other followers carried out the Tate-LaBianca murders. The term “Helter Skelter” was used for an impending race war by, for ten points, what serial killer who led a cult in California in the 1960s?	ANSWER: Charles Milles MansonMaddox
A  composer  from  this  country  called  for  instruments  like  deer  hooves  and  butterfly  cocoons  in  his Sinfonia India.  The  conductor  Gustavo  Dudamel  popularized  a  piece  by  a  composer  from  this  country calledDanzon Number 2. Another composer from this country took Aaron Copland to a dance hall in this country’s capital. Instruments like the vihuela and guitarron are prominent in musical ensembles in, for ten points, what home country of Carlos Chavez, the birthplace of mariachi music?	ANSWER: Mexico(or theUnitedMexicanStates)
One  side  was  enticed  to  initiate  this  battle  after  intercepting  secret  messages  aboard  the  ship Automedon.  During  this  battle,  the  Alexandra  Hospital  massacre  was  perpetrated  after  one  side  broke through a defense line that allegedly contained coastal guns facing the wrong way. After Arthur Percival’s much  larger  army  was  forced  to  surrender  at  this  battle,  Winston  Churchill  decried  it  as  “the  worst disaster” in British military history. For ten points, name this World War II battle for a city south of the Malay Peninsula.	ANSWER: Battle of Singapore Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
This poem, which was written on a trip to visit the father of the author’s lover Chester Kallman, was read on NPR following the 9/11 attacks. The “Daisy” Ad uses a variation of the final line from this poem, which states “We must love each other, or we must die.” This poem’s author claims he was “in one of the dives / On Fifty-second Street” when he heard the news of Germany invading Poland. For ten points, name this W.H. Auden poem written at, and named for, the start of World War II.	ANSWER: September1,1939
The  founder  of  this  group,  John  Elder,  was  sometimes  called  the  Fighting  Parson  for  his  knack  of keeping  a  rifle  while  delivering  sermons.  Benjamin  Franklin’s  “Narrative  of  the  Late  Massacres”  claims that  attacks  carried  out  by  this  group  were  more  savage  than  those  of  their  victims,  the  Conestoga and  Susquehannock.  After  failing  to  receive  government  support,  this  group  undertook  a  1764  march on Philadelphia. For ten points, name this group of Scottish and Irish immigrants on the Pennsylvania frontier.	ANSWER: PaxtonBoys
In  demonstrating  that  dead  yeast  cells  produced  sugar  via  these  things,  Eduard  Buchner  disputed Louis  Pasteur’s  view  that  living  cells  were  needed  for  fermentation.  In  2018,  Frances  Arnold  won  the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for her work in engineering these things. The presence of one of these things named rennet allowed ancient Egyptians who stored milk in dried stomachs to create cheese. The suffix ase [spellit] is usually used in the names of, for ten points, what biological macromolecules that speed up chemical reactions?	ANSWER:enzymes (prompt on (biological) catalysts)
A key leader of this movement had a brother who helped win the Battle of Ayacucho and founded the newspaperNorthern Star.  This  movement  included  striking  miners  in  Cornwall  in  the  Plug  Plot  Riots. Feargus O’Connor led this movement, which indirectly increased suffrage via the 1867 Great Reform Bill. This  movement  called  for  secret  ballots  and  annual  elections  for  Parliament.  For  ten  points,  name  this 19th century British working class movement for political reform that called for the vote for all men over age 21.	ANSWER: Chartism(accept word forms, likeChartists)
Bill Anthrell hosted an event at this university at which he claimed he was going to kill a dog with napalm. A lawsuit following the most famous event at this university targeted then-governor Jim Rhodes, who sent the National Guard to this university. Contrary to popular belief, a 14-year old runaway was not a student of this university, despite being depicted in a photograph next to one of the four students killed on May 4, 1970. For ten points, name this Ohio university where Vietnam War protesters were infamously shot.	ANSWER: KentStateUniversity Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
An infamous doctrine developed by this man prevented the extradition of terrorists back to Italy. This man  signed  the  Gayssot  Act  to  make  denial  of  the  Holocaust  illegal.  This  man  controversially  ordered Operation  Satan,  the  bombing  of  the  Greenpeace  shipRainbow Warriorin  New  Zealand  waters.  This leader’s  tenure  featured  twocohabitationswith  Edouard  Balladur  and  Jacques  Chirac.  For  ten  points, name this first socialist president of France.	ANSWER: Francois Mitterand
Descriptionnotacceptable; this has a name. The main inhabitant of this facility lived in the first of three security zones in an area protected from direct exposure to the sun. The Todt Organization built this facility near the town of Rastenberg in the Masurian woods. An assassination attempt at this location was known as Operation Valkyrie and failed on July 20, 1944, a few months before its occupant left it for an underground bunker in Berlin. For ten points, name this fortified residence that served as Hitler’s headquarters on the Eastern Front.	ANSWER: Wolf ’sLair(orWolfsschanze; do not accept or prompt on “Fuhrerbunker”)
At its 1931 opening, this bridge surpassed the Ambassador Bridge as the longest bridge in the world. This bridge, which was originally slated to be named the Knickerbocker Bridge, terminates at Fort Lee on one side. For a week in September 2013, two of this bridge’s three lanes were closed during rush hour traffic, a political punishment for Mark Sokolich for not supporting Chris Christie’s run for Governor of New Jersey. For ten points, name this bridge across the Hudson River.	ANSWER: GeorgeWashingtonBridge (acceptGWBorGWBridge)
This war, which was concentrated along the Daya River, was won by a king referred to in some texts as Priyadarsi. This war ended with a successful “mission of the peace,” according to the author ofMilitary History of Orissa. The successor to Bindusara started this war, whose victor decided to devote himself to the principle ofahimsa, or non-violence. According to the thirteenth Rock Edict, over 150,000 members of the losing kingdom were killed by the Mauryans in, for ten points, what war that led Ashoka to convert to Buddhism?	ANSWER: KalingaWar
The losing side’s strategy during this battle was known asPlan A-Go. Despite the risk of submarine attacks, Marc Mitscher heroically turned on the lights of his flight decks to help fighter pilots return to safety  during  this  battle.  In  a  debriefing  aboard  the  USSLexingtona  pilot  compared  this  battle  to  an “old-time” event “down home,” hence providing the nickname “Great Marianas Turkey Shoot.” The last carrier-on-carrier battle between the U.S. and Japan was, for ten points, what battle fought in a body of water bordering Mindanao?	ANSWER: Battle of the PhilippineSea(acceptGreatMarianasTurkeyShootbefore mentioned) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
This  settlement  was  abandoned  after  the  loss  of  a  trade  network  centered  on  Kilwa,  leading  its inhabitants to settle Mutapa. Sites at this settlement include the Great Enclosure and the Hill Complex, where eight birds carved of soapstone were once supposed to have stood. It was constructed by the Shona people,  who  protected  themselves  with  high  walls  built  without  mortar.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Iron Age settlement that lends its name to an African country with capital Harare.	ANSWER: GreatZimbabwe(prompt on Zimbabwe)
This man was not given songwriting credit on “Never Learn Not to Love” by the Beach Boys, even though it was derived from this man’s song “Cease to Exist.” This man’s belief in hidden messages on the Beatles’White Albuminspired the idea of a “Helter Skelter” race war. One of the stars ofValley of the Dolls, Sharon Tate, was over eight months pregnant when this man’s followers murdered her in 1969. For ten points, name this cult leader who died in prison in 2017.	ANSWER: Charles Manson
A treaty with this name included the secret Act of Seclusion, by which the future William III lost the title of Stadtholder. The first and third Anglo-Dutch Wars were ended by treaties of this name. A 1931 statute  of  this  name  established  protocols  between  the  U.K.  and  dominion  realms.  A  religious  building with this name was built on the orders of Edward the Confessor and was the site of his burial. For ten points, give the name shared by the abbey where British monarchs are coronated.	ANSWER: Westminster(accept  Treaty  ofWestminster;  accept  Statute  ofWestminster;  accept WestminsterAbbey)
One of these ships was deemed too slow for the Pacific Theatre and was used in Operation Leader in Norway. During Operation Torch, one of these ships supported ground troops and was namedRanger. In order to prevent the capture of Port Moresby by Japan, two of these ships were sent to the Coral Sea, leading to the scuttling of one called theLexington. These ships were not present during the attack on Pearl Harbor. TheYorktownwas, for ten points, what type of ship that provides a runway for warplanes?	ANSWER: aircraft carriers
This man publicly debated Michel Foucault [foo-koh] in a TV program titledHuman Nature: Justice versus Power. This man defended the right of a Holocaust denier to publish in the Faurisson affair. This thinker, who worked with Edward Herman on a book critical of the Vietnam War, coined the nonsense phrase “colorless green ideas sleep furiously” to illustrate the difference between grammar and syntax. For ten points, name this outspoken MIT professor, often considered the father of modern linguistics.	ANSWER: (Avram) Noam Chomsky Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
While serving this state, Matthew Lyon spat tobacco juice and defended himself with fireplace tongs during  a  1798  incident  with  Roger  Griswold  in  the  House  of  Representatives.  Seth  Warner  served  as a  captain  in  a  militia  sometimes  called  the  Bennington  Mob,  named  for  a  city  in  this  state.  Benning Wentworth made a series of land grants, including the town of Burlington, in, for ten points, what 14th US State where, in 1825, the Marquis de Lafayette toured Montpelier?	ANSWER: Vermont
This man was placed under house arrest after an outpouring of grief on Tomb-Sweeping Day; that came during a period of turmoil in which this man’s son was thrown out of a fourth-story window. This man,  who  succeeded  the  proponent  of  the  “Two  Whatevers,”  Hua  Guofeng[hwagwo-fun],  established Special Economic Zones as part of a philosophy that he summarized as “It doesn’t matter whether a cat is white or black, as long as it catches mice.” For ten points, name this “paramount leader” of China from 1978 to 1992 who began the country’s market reforms.	ANSWER: DengXiaoping[“done”shao-ping]
This man’s brother killed Spencer Pettis after Pettis criticized this man’s work. Louis McLane was reassigned to the State Department for refusing to remove funds from an organization run by this man. After Langdon Cheves resigned, James Monroe replaced him with this man. In a political cartoon, this man is shown wearing a top hat as part of a many-headed monster being slain by the seventh President of the United States. Andrew Jackson was challenged by, for ten points, what final president of the Second Bank of the United States?	ANSWER: NicholasBiddle
A statue in this building allegedly features the face of an enemy general carved on the back of its head. This building’s 36 columns are accompanied by 48 stone festoons to indicate the growing number of states. Henry Bacon designed this building in the likeness of a Greek Doric temple, and Daniel Chester French designed a seated marble sculpture inside. Martin Luther King gave his “I Have a Dream” speech on the steps of, for ten points, what building that honors the 16th US President?	ANSWER: LincolnMemorial
While serving as consul, a man of this name oversaw the debate over the Oppian Law restricting the amount of wealth a woman could own, as well as two Porcian Laws protecting citizens from severe punishment. A man with this name opposed Julius Caesar and once forced him to choose a consulship over  a  triumph.  The  elder  statesman  of  this  name  got  his  wish  in  the  Third  Punic  War  when  Scipio Africanus razed a city that legendarily had salt sowed in its soil. For ten points, give this name shared by a censor of Rome who repeated at the end of his speeches, “Carthage must be destroyed.”	ANSWER: Cato(acceptCatothe Younger orCatothe Elder) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
A  paper  by  Donald  Regan  interprets  the  result  of  this  court  case  to  hold  that  people  cannot  be forced to become Good Samaritans. Justice Byron White claimed that the result of this case was the only irredeemable error the court made during his tenure. TheCaseycase built upon the result of this case to expand the definition of the word “viability,” doing away with its trimester-based framework. For ten points, name this 1973 case that legalized abortion in the U.S.	ANSWER: Roev.Wade(accept either underlined portion; accept in either order)
Shortly  after  reports  of  this  scandal  emerged,  the  Bybee  Memo  was  leaked,  which  was  followed shortly  by  the  resignation  of  Jack  Goldsmith.  Antonio  Taguba’s  report  on  this  scandal  concluded  that Brigadier  General  Janis  Karpinski  allowed  it  to  continue.  One  picture  that  emerged  from  this  scandal depicts Charles Graner and Lynnie England giving a thumbs up behind a naked human pyramid. For ten points, name this scandal regarding US military personnel torturing detainees of an Iraqi prison.	ANSWER: AbuGhraibprison torture scandal (prompt on less specific answers, such as the Iraq prison scandal)
Before this battle, Thomas Rusk was told to take control if another commander refused to fight. The “Twin Sister” cannons were smuggled down the Mississippi River in preparation for this battle. Manuel Castrillon’s sleeping troops were ambushed in this battle, in which the victorious side rallied with cries to “remember the Alamo.” During this 18-minute engagement, the troops of Sam Houston captured Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna. For ten points, name this battle that secured Texan independence from Mexico.	ANSWER: Battle of SanJacinto
On this island, the ambush of the Four Four Bravo patrol prompted racial violence during Black July. Lourenco de Almeida established a Portuguese fort on this island to counter Jaffna influence. Thanks to the  evangelizing  of  Mahinda,  Ashoka’s  son,  Theravada  Buddhism  is  prominent  on  this  island,  contrary to  the  neighboring  mainland.  For  ten  points,  name  this  home  island  of  the  Sinhalese  and  Tamil  ethnic groups, a country whose largest city is Colombo.	ANSWER: SriLanka(acceptCeylon)
Bruce  Hoffman’s  “Inside  [this  activity]”  describes  the  way  in  which  it  has  been  politicized  by  its victims.  Alan  Krueger’s  2007  study  found  that  this  activity  was  less  likely  to  be  carried  out  by  those from  an  impoverished  background.  Examples  of  this  activity  include  the  Kunduz  airlift  in  2001,  which was “state-sponsored” and led to a practitioner of this activity living in Abbottabad until 2011. For ten points, name this general term for intentional violence committed to achieve a political or ideological goal.	ANSWER: terrorism(accept word forms; prompt on close, descriptive answers) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
Description  acceptable.  During  this  event,  Captain  Arthur  Slatter  helped  kill  a  charging  foe  “just thirteen paces from where we stood.” This event was undertaken with hundreds of guides, including the leader’s  son  Kermit,  and  it  provided  the  Smithsonian  Institution  with  exhibits  for  its  new  Museum  of Natural History. Eleven black rhinoceros, 17 lions, and thousands of birds were among the victims of, for ten points, what year-long expedition, begun in 1909 shortly after its leader declined to run for re-election, in which a former U.S. President shot and collected thousands of animals?	ANSWER: Theodore “Teddy” Roosevelt’s1909-10 Africansafari(accept any description ofRoosevelt going on ahuntin Africa; prompt on partial answers)
Henry le Despenser ended this conflict with a victory at North Walsham. A leader of this event was slain while meeting with William Walworth at Smithfield. The Savoy Palace was burned down during this event, in which Simon Sudbury was killed after the cleric John Ball incited protesters to storm the Tower of London. This event was prompted by a poll tax of Richard II. Wat Tyler led, for ten points, what 1381 rebellion of the lower class in England?	ANSWER: Peasant’s  Revolt  (or  uprising,  etc.;  acceptWatTyler’sRebellion,  Revolt,  etc.  before  his name is mentioned)
In  this  location,  soapstone  monoliths  depict  raptor-like  “birds  of  heaven,”  and  houses  in  this  site are  made  of  mud  bricks  called  daga.  This  city  is  legendarily  conflated  with  the  Palace  of  the  Queen  of Sheba. Decorative masonry used in a Conical Tower in this city lead to its Shona name meaning “houses of stone,” and parallel walls surrounding this city are known as the Great Enclosure. For ten points, name this “Great” city, built several centuries ago in Masvingo Province in its namesake African country.	ANSWER: Great Zimbabwe
Louis-Antoine Beaunier received a royal commission to construct one of these structures to aid the mining  industry  in  the  Loire  basin.  The  first  of  these  structures  in  Paris  started  at  the  Gare  du  Nord. Saint- ́ Etienne  was  an  early  center  for  these  structures,  which  were  financed  by  the  Perri`ere  brothers through the Cr ́edit Mobilier. In 1937, these systems were nationalized in France under the SNCF, which still runs them today. For ten points, name these structures, which link cities like Lyon and Paris.	ANSWER: French railways
An observatory dedicated to this natural feature is located in the town of Parkfield. This feature meets  the  ocean  at  Mussel  Rock.  One  event  caused  by  this  natural  feature  caused  the  collapse  of  the Nimitz Freeway and was broadcast live during the 1989 World Series. A disaster named for Loma Prieta was  caused  by,  for  ten  points,  what  boundary  between  the  Pacific  and  North  American  Plates  whose movement also led to the 1906 San Francisco earthquake?	ANSWER:SanAndreasFault Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
The  Sicilian  Vespers  helped  prevent  one  of  these  events  from  occurring  by  burning  the  ships  of Charles of Anjou in Messina harbor.  The use of Greek Fire in the Bosphorus strait helped stop one of these events.  A successful one of these events saw Orban design the massive Dardanelles cannon at the behest of Mehmed II. One of the most well known of these events was ordered by Enrico Dandolo during the Fourth Crusade.  For ten points, name these events that involve looting the capitol of the Byzantine Empire.	ANSWER: sacksofConstantinople
This man claimed to use a hand-pumped rail car to scout for trains while on an unapproved mission in Veracruz.  This general neutralized Raubal in his direction of Operation Cartwheel, a year after an invasion on the Lingayen Gulf forced his retreat to Corregidor.  Six months after the Wake Island Conference, this man was dismissed from command of a war in which he organized the Inchon landing.  For ten points, name  this  commander  of  U.N.  forces  during  the  Korean  War,  who  proclaimed  “I  shall  return”  to  the Philippines during World War II.	ANSWER: Douglas MacArthur
In  1996,  “Bob  Dole”  and  “Clinton”  were  used  interchangeably  in  one  of  these  documents.   One of  these  documents  referenced  Dieppe  the  day  before  it  was  raided,  and  these  documents  accidentally used  codenames  learned  from  American  soldiers  in  the  leadup  to  D-Day.   For  aesthetic  purposes,  these documents usually feature radial symmetry and no “cheater” black squares.” for ten points, name these word  games,  edited  by  Will  Shortz  for  theNew York Times,  which  feature  clues  to  fill  in  words  going across and down.	ANSWER: crosswordpuzzles
Alfred  Blunt,  Bishop  of  Bradford,  delivered  an  address  against  this  event  and  advocated  “divine grace”  for  its  subject.   A  missed  meeting  at  the  Aberdeen  Royal  Infirmary  helped  fan  suspicion  about this  event.   Walter  Monckton  assisted  with  the  legal  issues  of  this  event,  and  Stanley  Baldwin  blocked an attempt by this event’s perpetrator to address the nation.  Socialite Wallis Simpson provoked, for ten points, what 1936 event, the only formal renunciation of the throne since the Anglo-Saxon period?	ANSWER: abdicationofEdwardVIII(accept  synonyms  for  “abdicate,”  such  asEdwardVIII givinguptheBritishthronebefore “formal” is read;  prompt on descriptions of the courtship and/or (proposed) marriage of Edward VIII and Wallis Simpson before her name is mentioned)
The ruling in this case overruled an appelate ruling that found that the “Constitution is silent on the subject,” thereby protecting the implied power of Congress to carry out constitutional laws by “necessary and  proper”  means.   Chief  Justice  John  Marshall  noted  that  “the  power  to  tax  involves  the  power  to destroy” in his unanimous decision in, for ten points, what 1819 Supreme Court case lodged against the Bank of the United States by the state of Maryland?	ANSWER: McCullochv.  Maryland Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 7
This  empire  won  a  battle  by  using  hit-and-run  tactics,  then  feigning  retreat  to  lure  Kitbuqa’s army  into  a  trap;  in  that  battle,  this  empire  was  led  by  Baibars  and  Saif  ad-Din  Qutuz.   Shortly  after Hulagu sacked Aleppo, this empire won the aforementioned Battle of Ain Jalut and retook Syria from the Mongols.  These people created a sultanate centered in Cairo after ending the Ayyubid Dynasty.  For ten points, name this class of Islamic soldiers in Egypt that originated from Turkish slaves.	ANSWER: Mamluksultanate
The  subject  of  this  film  was  inspired  by  its  star’s  study  with  Roger  Revelle.   Oklahoma  Senator Jim  Inhofe  compared  this  film  to  Hitler’sMein Kampf.   This  film  won  Best  Original  Song  for  Melissa Etheridge’s “I Need to Wake Up,” and it explains the Keeling Curve in a “slide show” that shows retreating glaciers and other damage caused by the greenhouse effect.  For ten points, name this 2006 documentary in which former Vice President Al Gore gives a presentation on the dangers of global warming.	ANSWER: AnInconvenientTruth
The Mongols supposedly filled nine sacks with these objects after defeating Henry the Pious of Silesia at Legnica.  During the Vietnam War, 101st Airborne’s Tiger Force unit was accused of creating necklaces out of these objects.  James Oglethorpe led troops at the battles of Gully Hole Creek and Bloody Marsh in a war named for one of these objects lost by a smuggler; after three years, that war became a part of the larger War of the Austrian Succession.  Robert Jenkins lost, for ten points, what body part?	ANSWER: severed ears (accept (War of)Jenkins’Ear)
This man’s concept of “election” was rejected by Karl Barth.  The Consensus Tigurinus resolved a dispute between this man and Huldrych Zwingli [z’ving-lee] over the nature of the Eucharist.  Nicolas de la Fontaine brought Michael Servetus to trial on behalf of this man, which led to Servetus being burned at the stake.  He believed that God alone chooses who is saved, according to his idea of predestination. For ten points, name this French Protestant and author ofThe Institutes of Christian Religionwho led the Reformation in Geneva.	ANSWER: John Calvin
During  the  writing  of  the  Articles  of  Confederation,  New  Hampshire  and  New  York  blocked the  adoption  of  this  measure.    Roger  Sherman  and  James  Wilson  re-introduced  this  measure  at  the Constitutional  Convention,   preserving  language  about  the  exclusion  of  “Indians  not  taxed.”  The Thirteenth Amendment nullified this clause of the Constitution, which was used to balance Congressional representation between the North and South.  For ten points, name this compromise regarding the value of the American slave population, which used a fractional formula.	ANSWER: Three-FifthsCompromise
In  1908,  this  commander's  ship,  the  USS Decatur,  ran  aground,  leading  to  this  man being  found  guilty  of  dereliction  of  duty.  This  man  served  as  the  signing  representative  of the U.S. aboard the Missouri during the unconditional surrender of another country. In 1945, this man succeeded his superior Ernest King as Chief of Naval Operations after commanding forces against  Japan.  For ten  points,  name  this  U.S.  fleet  admiral  who  was  the  commander- in-chief of the Unites States' Pacific Fleet during World War Two.	ANSWER: Chester W(illiam) Nimitz
This ruler personally met with Richard Cobden, convincing him to sign the Cobden- Chevalier  [[sheh-vahl-YAY]]  agreement,  which  sparked  the  "golden  age"  of  free  trade treaties.  This  ruler  personally  led  the  victorious  army  at  the  Battle  of  Magenta  before directly defeating Franz Joseph I at the Battle of Solferino. Though he narrowly avoided war during  the  Luxembourg  Crisis,  this  monarch  openly  wandered  the  battlefield  before  being captured  by  invading  Germans  at  Sedan.  For  ten  points,  name  this  president-turned- emperor, the last monarch of France.	ANSWER: Napoleon III (or Charles Louis Napoléon Bonaparte; prompt on partial answer)
The ascetic Saint Simeon sat on a pillar near this settlement for nearly four decades. This  western  terminus  of  the  Silk  Road  once  served  as  the  capital  of  the  Ayyubid  Dynasty until  its  sacking  by  the Mongols.  A  four-year  battle  between  Kurdish  militia called  the YPG and the independent FSA dislodged pro-Assad forces from this city in 2016. For ten points, name  this  second-largest  city  in Syria,  which  Libertarian  Gary  Johnson  was  curiously unaware of during the 2016 presidential election.	ANSWER: Aleppo (or Ḥalab)
While  being  investigated  by  the  Lytton  Commission,  this  noble  recorded  that  he hoped to ask the namesake official for asylum in interwar Britain but instead was cowed by Seishirō Itagaki. Yuan Shikai [[SHEE-KYE]]  succeeded  this  royal  after  his  regent,  Empress Dowager  Longyu,  issued  the  abdication  edict  in  1912.  Imperial  Japan  placed  this  monarch on the throne of their puppet state, Manchukuo [[mahn-CHOO-kwoh]]. The last monarch of China was, for ten points, which child-ruler known as the Xuantong Emperor?	ANSWER: Puyi (or Yaozhi; accept Xuantong Emperor before mentioned)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 8
Aeneas  and  Anchises  [[ahn-KYE-ses]]  collected  ritual statues  found  in  these places, which they called "our holy symbols," shortly before fleeing Troy in the Aeneid. They're not temples, but statues of the trimorphic goddess Hecate [[heh-KAH-teh]] were often placed at these sites. The lararium was an altar or niche in these places meant for gods known as the Lares Familiares, or family deities. The Domus was a Roman variety of, for ten points, what type of locale used as human residences?	ANSWER: Homes (or Houses; accept Domicile; accept Residence before mentioned; or other synonyms; accept Domus before mentioned)
The  geographer  Strabo  uses  this  ruler's  name  to  refer  to  a  region  in  the  Armenian highlands  and  Caucasian  Albania.  According  to  Herodotus,  this  ruler's  50,000-strong  army disappeared  in  a  desert  sandstorm  en  route  to  destroy  the  Siwa  Oasis.  Shortly  after  his death by a self-inflicted stab wound, a civil war between the usurper Bardiya and the future Darius the Great broke out. The conquest of Egypt was completed by, for ten points, which Persian ruler and son of Cyrus the Great?	ANSWER: Cambyses II (accept Cambysene)
Despite  the  written  support  of  Dowager  Queen  Sophie,  this  man  was  exiled  due  to his   known   support   of   the   followers   of   Philip   Melanchthon.   This   man   built   an   early observatory  known  as  the  Castle  of  Urania  with  funding  from  Frederick  II  of  the  House  of Oldenburg. In a duel with Manderup Parsburg, this man lost part of his nose at age twenty and  wore  a  brass  prosthetic  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  The  astronomer  Johannes  [[yoh-HAHN- ness]] Kepler served as the assistant of, for ten points, which Danish astronomer of the 16th century?	ANSWER: Tycho Brache (or Tyge Ottesen Brahe)
During  the  second  of  these  wars,  public  opinion  was  outraged  by  rumors  that bloodhounds imported from Cuba were being used to mutilate opponents. Wiley Thompson attempted  to  depose  several  chiefs,  including  Micanopy  [[me-kah-NOH-pee]],  during  these wars. The first of these wars was ended by the Treaty of Moultrie Creek, and the third was ignited  in  1855  by  Billy  Bowlegs.  The  physical  copy  of  the  Treaty  of  Payne's  Landing  was stabbed by Osceola at the start of one of these wars. For ten points, name this series of three wars in which all but 500 of the namesake Native Americans were removed from Florida.	ANSWER: Seminole Wars (prompt on "Florida War(s))  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 8
This   man's   only   wound   during   a   war   was   a   bayonet   to   the   posterior   while investigating a trench he constructed during the Siege of Ninety-Six. This man emigrated to the  U.S.  following  his  capture  at  the  Battle  of  Maciejowice  [[mah-cheh-yoh-WIT-seh]]  and the subsequent partition of his homeland. This man, who strengthened the defenses of West Point,  served  as  an  advisor  to  Nathaniel  Greene  during  his  Southern  campaign.  For  ten points,  name  this military  engineer  who  led  the 1794  Polish  rebellion  and also served as a fortifications expert during the American Revolution.	ANSWER: Tadeusz Kościuszko (or Andrzej Tadeusz Bonawentura Kościuszko; accept Andrew Thaddeus Bonaventure Kosciuszko)
By the time of his accession to his highest position, this figure had earned the titles "Lord  of  Men"  and  "Person  from  the  House  of  Darts."  This  monarch  widened  the  divide between commoners and the pipiltin noble class, resulting in his eventual abandonment and death  by  stoning.  This ruler  was  succeeded  by  the  brief  reign  of  Cuitláhuac  [[kweet-LAH- hwak]], and all his sons were killed by the inhabitants of Tenochtitlan. Spanish forces under Hernan Cortes captured, for ten points, which last Emperor of the Aztecs?	ANSWER: Montezuma II (accept Moctezuma II; or Motecuhzomatzin)   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 8
Walter Jarboe operated a gang of mercenaries in this state, kidnapping Yuki natives. Despite banning African American slavery, this state allowed for “apprenticing” of Native Americans in a form of slavery documented by John Ross Browne. In this state, Sheriff William Dixon massacred more than 150 Wintu people in the Bridge Gulch massacre. Slave labor in this state built New Helvetia, a fort owned by John Sutter.  For  ten  points,  name  this  state  where  many  Native  Americans  were  killed  during  an  1849  gold rush.	ANSWER: California
Privateer  Henry  Jennings  attacked  salvagers  of  this  country’s  ships  that  had  sunk  in  a  hurricane in 1715. A fleet of this country was captured by Piet Hein at the Bay of Matanzas, and George Rooke attacked this fleet at Vigo Bay in 1702. This country caused relatively high inflation in a namesake Price Revolution  that  was  driven  by  trade  of  cochineal  dye,  silver  from  Callao,  and  other  items  regulated  at its Casa de Contrataci ́on. For ten points, name this European country that operated a treasure fleet of galleons between Manila and Acapulco.	ANSWER: Spain
This man’s uncle of the same name and his brother Stesagoras each ruled the Chersonese as tyrants. Late  in  life,  this  man  suffered  a  leg  wound  while  attacking  the  island  of  Paros;  he  was  imprisoned  for treason and died of gangrene. This man, who was forced to fight the Scythians under Darius, convinced Athens  to  execute  messengers  sent  by  Darius  demanding  earth  and  water.  The  polemarch  Callimachus broke a tie on the advice of this man, leading to a decisive victory in 490 BC. For ten points, name this general whose strategy won the Battle of Marathon.	ANSWER: Miltiadesthe Younger
At  the  Dodan  Barracks,  a  leader  of  this  state  named  Philip  Effiong  gave  a  speech  declaring  its recognition of a rival nation’s government. The song “Land of the Rising Sun” was the official anthem of this state and was based on Jean Sibelius’Finlandia. This state’s forces were defeated during the invasion of Port Harcourt. This state was centered on the city of Enugu and led by Colonel Ojukwu for the three years of its existence. For ten points, name this Igbo-majority state that broke from Nigeria in 1967.	ANSWER: Biafra
This  man  rescued  W.J.  Walsh  from  drowning  while  posted  on  theTonopah.  Between  1949  and 1953, this man served as Plebiscite Administrator for Jammu and Kashmir. In Operation Galvanic, this man led the campaign to recapture the Gilbert Islands and he was made “Commander in Chief, Pacific Ocean Areas.” This admiral’s intelligence teams discovered a Japanese attack on Midway, leading to the destruction of four Japanese carriers. A class of nuclear aircraft carriers is named for, for ten points, what American World War II fleet admiral?	ANSWER: Chester William Nimitz, Sr. Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 8
This man’s son Pufang is an advocate for disability rights, having been paralyzed during torture by the Red Guards. This man consolidated power with the help of the Eight Elders, who met frequently at his home. This man worked with Zhao Ziyang to remove Hua Guofeng from the premiership, noting that “it doesn’t matter whether a cat is white or black as long as it catches mice.” This man was criticized for  suppressing  the  Tiananmen  Square  protests.  Shanghai  was  opened  to  foreign  investment  by,  for  ten points, what Chinese leader who reformed the economy in the 1980s?	ANSWER: DengXiaoping
This man’s daughter Mary played Kristin Shepard, who turned out to be the one who shot J.R. in the famous cliffhanger of the soap operaDallas. This man, whose last TV appearance was on a Christmas special  singing  a  duet  with  David  Bowie,  co-starred  in  a  film  series  beginning  withRoad to Singapore with Bob Hope. A recording of this man was used in Operation Frequent Wind to signal the American evacuation from Saigon. For ten points, name this American actor and singer of “White Christmas.”	ANSWER: Harold “Bing” Crosby
This  general’s  Philipsburg  Proclamation  offered  fugitive  slaves  freedom  upon  joining  the  British Army.  This  general  assumed  his  highest  post  after  a  large  party  known  as  the  Mischianza  was  thrown for  his  predecessor.  In  an  attempt  to  relieve  Burgoyne,  this  man  led  the  capture  of  Fort  Montgomery and dismantled the Hudson River Chain. This man was succeeded by Guy Carleton in his highest post in  1782  after  the  defeat  of  General  Cornwallis  at  the  Battle  of  Yorktown.  For  ten  points,  name  this Commander-in-Chief of British forces in North America after William Howe.	ANSWER: HenryClinton
This philosopher, who developed a method of steam distillation to produce rose water and essential oils, claimed he had read Aristotle’sMetaphysics40 times before reading a commentary by al-Farabi. This main target of al-Ghazali’sThe Incoherence of the Philosophersargued for the existence of the soul with the “floating man” argument.The Canon of MedicineandThe Book of Healingwere written by, for ten points, what Persian Islamic philosopher of the 11th century?	ANSWER: Avicenna(oribnSina; orAbuAliSina; orPurSina)
The  Great  Plank  Road,  or  Canyon  Road,  was  built  to  connect  this  city  to  the  Tualatin  Valley. Francis Pettygrove and Asa Lovejoy flipped a coin to decide the name of this city, whose suburbs include Clackamas and a town developed by ship workers Vanport. Henry Kaiser helped build Liberty Ships in this Pacific Northwest city, where early settlers described it as “Stumptown.” For ten points, name this former timber hub in Oregon that was named in honor of a city in Maine.	ANSWER: Portland Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 8
An event involving these two countries is the subject of a Quentin Tarantino-produced documentary, Freedom’s Fury. During that event, one participant saw “about 4,000 stars” after being struck by Valentin Prokopov. Ervin Zador’s face wound nearly led to a riot in Melbourne during a 1956 Olympic water polo match  between,  for  ten  points,  what  two  countries,  one  of  which  had  just  had  a  revolution  crushed  in Budapest by the other?	ANSWER: SovietUnionandHungary(accept  in  either  order;  acceptUnion  ofSovietSocialist Republics in place of Soviet Union)
This  man  was  briefly  restored  to  power  by  Zhang  Xun.  This  man  benefited  from  the  Articles  of Favourable Treatment, though that was revised following a coup by Feng Yuxiang. Prince Zaifeng ruled as a regent for this man, who was tutored in his early years by Reginald Johnston. This man, who was forced to abdicate at age 6, was the subject of a Bernardo Bertolucci biopic that detailed his path from Cixi’s successor to puppet leader of Manchukuo. For ten points, name this final emperor of China.	ANSWER: Puyi(acceptXuantongEmperor)
During this battle, the ambassador Mikelis was shot trying to board theGuerrier, prompting theAsia to open fire. Prime Minister Wellington sacked this battle’s winning commander, who had controversially provoked  a  showdown  by  anchoring  his  fleet  across  from  the  losing  side’s  horseshoe  formation  once reinforcements  from  Henri  de  Rigny  and  Lodewijk [lode-veek]  Heyden  arrived.  This  battle,  which  was prompted  by  the  losing  side’s  decision  to  reject  the  Treaty  of  London,  featured  an  allied  fleet  under Edward  Codrington  defeating  the  Ottoman  navy.  For  ten  points,  name  this  decisive  1827  battle  of  the Greek War of Independence.	ANSWER: Battle of Navarino
This  collection  was  published  with  an  acrostic  explanation  of  its  history  that  spells  out  the  word “ricercar.” This collection’s second piece is a six-voice fugue that was one of the first-ever compositions for piano; that selection from this work answered a challenge made at the Sanssouci Palace in Potsdam by a Prussian king who wrote the original theme. For ten points, name this collection of keyboard music by Johann Sebastian Bach based on a theme given to him by Frederick the Great.	ANSWER: The MusicalOffering(or DasMusikalischesOpfer; acceptBWV1079)
This man’s story was popularized in a ballad created by his friend Wallace Saunders. A sound that mimicked a whippoorwill call became identified with this man, who built a six-tube whistle for his work with the Illinois Central. This man told Sim Webb, a fireman, to leap out of their car, saving his life in an accident that killed only this man. For ten points, name this engineer who became a folk hero after heroically slowing his train prior to a collision in 1900.	ANSWER: Casey Jones Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
Though his mother offered his weight in gold as compensation for his corpse, this man was buried by William Malet. This man’s brother divided his land between this man and Beorn. After a shipwreck, this man was captured and taken to Beaurain by Guy, Count of Ponthieu. This brother of Sweyn won a battle that followed Fulford, and at his most famous battle, this man fought alongside Leofwine. An arrow to the eye legendarily killed, for ten points, what Anglo-Saxon king who was defeated by William the Conqueror at Hastings?	ANSWER: HaroldGodwinson(acceptHaroldII; prompt on partial answers)
TheOfficial Bulletinwas the daily newspaper of this organization, which released films likePersching’s Answer. A piece created by this organization shows a gorilla holding a struggling woman and contains the caption “Destroy this Mad Brute.” Workers in this organization gave over 7.5 million speeches during the changing of film reels; those speakers were known as Four Minute Men. Posters encouraging civilians to buy liberty bonds were created by, for ten points, what committee that used propaganda to build support for American participation in World War I?	ANSWER: CreelCommittee (acceptCommitteeOnPublicInformation)
Publius Mucius Scaevola was the last holder of this position to have written for theAnnales Maximi, a yearly set of annals published by its holders. While serving as king, Numa Pompilius created this position, whose final holder was a member of the Second Triumvirate alongside Octavian and Marc Antony. Lepidus once  held  this  position,  which  served  a  role  similar  to  therex  sacrorum.  The  title  of  “Greatest  bridge builder” was bestowed on, for ten points, what office that oversaw the priesthood of Roman religion?	ANSWER:PontifexMaximus(acceptGreatestBridgeBuilderbefore mentioned; prompt on partial answers)
Elizabeth Lee Hazen and Rachel Fuller Brown named the first antifungal antibiotic in honor of this state.  George  Soper  failed  to  collect  samples  from  a  woman  in  this  state,  where  Dr.  Sarah  Josephine Baker’s  efforts  led  to  the  hospitalization  and  quarantine  of  Mary  Mallon,  who  carried  the  pathogen responsible for typhoid fever. For ten points, name this state where public health officials wrote symbols in chalk on people during six-second medical examinations administered to immigrants at Ellis Island.	ANSWER: NewYork
The  evacuation  of  Walnut  Hills  was  overseen  by  Andrew  Ellicott  after  the  signing  of  this  treaty. The  cessation  of  a  line  between  the  Pearl  and  Perdido  Rivers  was  agreed  upon  as  part  of  this  treaty. Ownership rights over the Tombigbee and Natchez districts were discussed as part of this treaty, which resolved  the  West  Florida  Controversy  and  gave  the  United  States  navigation  rights  of  the  Mississippi River. A prominent Federalist negotiated, for ten points, what 1795 treaty between the U.S. and Spain?	ANSWER:Pinckney’s Treaty (accept Treaty ofSanLorenzo; accept Treaty ofMadrid; acceptTreaty ofFriendship,Limits,andNavigationBetweenSpainandtheUnitedStates) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
A  “requiem”  titled  for  this  battle  states  “What  like  a  bullet  can  undeceive,”  and  was  written  by Herman Melville. Ambrose Bierce described “What I Saw of [this battle]” in an 1874 short story. At this battle, Lew Wallace, the author ofBen-Hur, led a division that marched along the Shunpike Road due to confusion in their battle orders. For ten points, name this Civil War battle fought in Tennessee near Pittsburg Landing.	ANSWER: Battle of Shiloh(acceptShiloh: A Requiem; accept Battle ofPittsburgLandingbefore mentioned)
One leader of this country lost international support after caning students who protested mandatory uniforms;  that  man,  who  spent  30  million  dollars  on  a  Napoleonic  coronation,  came  to  power  in  this country’s Saint-Sylvestre coup, overthrowing David Dacko. Seleka rebels founded the Republic of Langone in this former French colony, which is currently ruled by Faustin-Archange Touadera. Jean-Bedel Bokassa once ruled, for ten points, what African country with capital at Bangui?	ANSWER: CentralAfricanRepublic
This woman mentored Marie Zakrzewska, who helped grow her dispensary at Tompkins Square into an institution that merged with New York Presbyterian in 2013. After receiving backlash from the United States Sanitary Commission, this woman helped establish the Women’s Central Relief Association during the  Civil  War.  Charles  Lee  bowed  to  this  woman  in  1849  while  granting  her  a  degree  earned  after  150 students unanimously agreed to accept her admittance at Geneva College. For ten points, name this first woman to obtain an American medical degree.	ANSWER: Elizabeth Blackwell
French traders are considered the first Europeans to have explored this area’s St. Francois and Boston Mountains.  This  region’s  White  and  Osage  Rivers  were  dammed  by  the  US  Army  Corps  of  Engineers in  1911  to  create  several  new  lakes,  and  its  Mark  Twain  National  Forest  was  restored  by  the  Civilian Conservation Corps in the 1930s. The Whitewater scandal concerned land development in, for ten points, what mountainous plateau primarily located in northern Arkansas and southern Missouri?	ANSWER: the Ozarks (acceptOzarkMountains; acceptOzarkPlateau)
In this war, the USSEssexand USSEssex Juniorwere captured off the coast of Chile. One side in this war ambushed a convoy at Henderson Bay which led to the Second Battle of Sacket’s Harbor. In an 1882 book, Theodore Roosevelt says the American navy gave the populace confidence in the face of an ineffectual army during this war. Fort Niagara was captured in, for ten points, what war in which Oliver Hazard Perry won the Battle of Lake Erie?	ANSWER: War of 1812 Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
Eugene Schuyler created a report of atrocities in this country. In this country, the Batak Massacre was  caused  by  Bashi-Bazouks  during  the  April  Uprising.  By  the  Treaty  of  San  Stefano,  this  country was liberated from Ottoman Rule by Russia in 1878, but its northern neighbor gained Dobruja. William Gladstone denounced the “horrors” of this country in his Midlothian Campaign. Simeon II was the last Tsar of, for ten points, what Balkan nation north of Greece that is ruled from Sofia?	ANSWER: Bulgaria
This  group  established  October  16th  as  the  Day  of  Atonement,  on  which  men  would  refrain  from engaging in activity harmful to their families. The beliefs of this group, collected in the bookThe Supreme Wisdom, tell of how Yakub created a race of evil people on the island of Patmos. A leader of this group, Louis  Farrakhan,  organized  the  Million  Man  March  on  Washington  in  1995.  For  ten  points,  name  this African-American religious group that adopted traditions of the prophet Muhammad.	ANSWER:NationofIslam(acceptNOI; do not accept or prompt on Islam alone)
Raymond  de  Sauvetˆat  was  the  first  leader  of  a  school  of  translators  based  in  this  city  during  the Middle Ages. Eleanor, a noblewoman from this city, became known as the Grand Duchess of Tuscany after marrying Cosimo I [thefirst] de Medici. This city, whose swords were once seen as the finest in Europe, is  home  to  the  Synagogue  of  El  Transito  in  its  Jewish  quarter.  Holy  Roman  Emperor  Charles  V  ruled mainly from this Castilian city. For ten points, name this “Imperial City” in Spain.	ANSWER:Toledo([toh-LAY-doh], but be lenient)
This composer dramatized the destruction of Missolonghi during the Greek War of Indepenedence in his operaThe Siege of Corinth. This composer repeated musical phrases in a namesake crescendo; that technique is employed in pieces like the overture toThe Thieving Magpie. A galop known as “The March of the Swiss Soldiers” concludes the overture to this man’s final opera, which depicts a Swiss folk hero who shoots an apple off his son’s head. For ten points, name this Italian composer ofWilliam Tell.	ANSWER: Gioachino Rossini
The first of these works urges caution, stating that “Nothing valuable can be lost by taking time,” before claiming that the “better angels of our nature” will once again stir the “mystic chords of memory.” One of these speeches quotes Matthew 18:7, saying “Woe unto the world because of offences,” and calls slavery one of those offenses. The second of these speeches advises action “With malice toward none, with charity for all.” For ten points, name these speeches delivered in 1861 and 1865 in Washington, DC.	ANSWER:  AbrahamLincoln’sInauguralAddresses  (prompt  on  partial  answers,  like  “speeches  of Lincoln” or “inaugural speeches”) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
One  side’s  plans  in  this  battle  were  almost  revealed  by  a  premature  attack  from  Adam  Stephen. The losing side of this battle had earlier been weakened by the departure of Carl von Donop’s men. The password  “victory  or  death”  was  used  in  this  battle,  in  which  Johann  Rall  was  mortally  wounded.  A famous  painting  by  Emanuel  Leutze[loyt-zah]  depicts  how  the  winning  side  in  this  battle  crossed  the Delaware River on Christmas Eve. For ten points, name this Revolutionary War battle in which George Washington surprised the Hessians.	ANSWER: Battle of Trenton
This man was demoted after he took the advice of the spy Yoshira and refused to attack. In a strait near  Jindo  Island,  this  man’s  dozen  ships  fended  off  Todo  Takatora’s  much  larger  fleet.  This  man  was killed by a stray arquebus bullet in the Battle of Noryang, during the later stages of the Imjin War. This admiral lost no ships in the Battle of Myeongnyang. Turtle ships defended the Joseon kingdom against Toyotomi Hideyoshi under, for ten points, what 16th century Korean naval commander?	ANSWER: YiSun-sin
Description acceptable. In 1993, one of these events was organized by Susan Sontag under candlelight only.  The  documentaryThe Impossible Itselfis  about  two  of  these  events,  held  at  Luttringhausen  and San  Quentin  prisons.  One  of  these  events  prominently  featured  a  tree  designed  by  Alberto  Giacometti, and the first of these events was witnessed by less than one hundred people in a Paris theater in 1953. For ten points, identify these events in which an absurdist work of Samuel Beckett is shown.	ANSWER: ProductionsofWaitingforGodot(accept synonyms for production, such asstagingor performance;  prompt  on  partial  answers,  such  as  “(putting  on  a)  play”  and  “(putting  on  a)  play  by Samuel Beckett” before his name is mentioned)
This country ceded the southern part of Dobruja to its southern neighbor in the Treaty of Craiova. Another  region  of  this  country,  Szekely[see-kay]  Land,  has  a  large  Hungarian-speaking  population.  A revolution in this country started in Timisoara [tim-ee-shor-uh] in 1989, and it traces its modern history to  the  1859  unification  of  the  principalities  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia.  This  country  is  separated  from Transylvania by the Carpathian Mountains. Vlad the Impaler once lived in, for ten points, what country with capital Bucharest?	ANSWER: Romania
After waiting over 800 days to be confirmed as U.S. Ambassador to this country, Cassandra Butts died of leukemia in 2016. The Hawksbill Creek Agreement guarantees that a planned city in this country enjoys  no  taxation;  that  city  of  Freeport  on  this  country’s  “Grand”  island  is  now  a  prominent  tourist hub. During the Civil War, blockade runners left from Charleston to this country’s port of Nassau. For ten  points,  name  this  member  of  the  British  Commonwealth,  an  island  chain  just  east  of  Florida  and northeast of Cuba.	ANSWER: (Commonwealth of) The Bahamas Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
This ruler executed Helvidius Priscus for defending the Senate’s right to manage state finances. This ruler’s bid for power was supported by Mucianus, the governor of Syria. This ruler worked with Agricola in the pacification of Britain, and he became the patron of historian Josephus, who he met while suppressing the Great Jewish Revolt. Shortly after the death of Nero, this man succeeded Vitellius to end the Year of the Four Emperors. For ten points, name this father of Titus and founder of the Flavian dynasty.	ANSWER: Vespasian(or Titus FlaviusVespasianus; do not accept or prompt on Titus)
An  event  that  took  place  at  this  location  filled  the  North  Fork  of  the  Toutle  River  with  sediment and  destroyed  the  tourist  camps  at  Spirit  Lake.  At  this  location,  known  to  the  Klickitat  tribe  as Louwala-Clough, photographer Reid Blackburn was killed near Coldwater Camp; in the aftermath of that event, Jimmy Carter described this location’s surroundings as more desolate than a moonscape. For ten points, name this mountain in the Cascades that killed 57 people in a May 18, 1980 volcanic eruption.	ANSWER: MountSt.Helens(orLouwala-Cloughbefore mention)
This man resisted his initial calling, saying that he was too young to speak; when he did begin his ministry, the people of his hometown tried to kill him, for which God promised destruction on the town of Anathoth. Near the end of his life, this man was forcibly taken to Egypt with his scribe Baruch, who recorded  this  man’s  sayings  into  a  namesake  book.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Israelite,  often  called  the “weeping prophet,” the author of the Book of Lamentations.	ANSWER: Jeremiah
An introductory quote made by this man titles a book chronicling his activities,I Heard You Paint Houses. This man rose to power by organizing support for Dave Beck. A prison sentence that this man received  for  illegally  distributing  pension  funds  was  commuted  by  Richard  Nixon  in  1971.  After  eating at  the  Machus  Red  Fox  restaurant  outside  of  Detroit,  this  man  vanished  mysteriously  in  1975.  For  ten points, name this thirteen-year president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.	ANSWER: James “Jimmy” Hoffa
In 2010, this city’s Park Kultury metro stop was suicide-bombed by two women working for Doku Umarov. Special forces were criticized for indiscriminately killing 130 civilians with poison gas while trying to resolve a hostage crisis in a theatre in this city. In 1999, FSB agents were accused of staging false flag apartment bombings upon this capital city in order to justify the Second Chechen War. For ten points, name this capital of the Russian Federation.	ANSWER:Moscow Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
This man documented his youthful trek from Indiana to Florida in his A Thousand-Mile Walk To The Gulf. This  man  opposed  a  common  ally,  Gifford  Pinchot,  over  the  construction  of  a  dam  in  the  Hetch Hetchy  Valley  in  the  aftermath  of  the  San  Francisco  fire. In  1903,  he  invited  Theodore  Roosevelt  on  a camping trip that inspired the President to transfer Yosemite to the U.S. government. For ten points, name this American conservationist, the founder of the Sierra Club.	ANSWER: John Muir
Leo Gorcey demanded $400 for his inclusion in this artwork. Jann Haworth and Peter Blake produced this  work,  which  features  three  depictions  of  Shirley  Temple  and  one  of  Stu  Sutcliffe. Gandhi  and  Hitler were removed from this artwork, whose central figures wear yellow, pink, blue, and red military uniforms. Dozens  of  cardboard  cutouts  are  arranged  in  the  background  of, for  ten  points,  what  artwork  that  was mass produced with a record that includes “A Day in the Life” and “Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds” by The Beatles?	ANSWER: the album cover for Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band
The  last  monarch  of  this  country  became  the  only  European  monarch  to  be  later  elected  Prime Minister. Theodor Dannecker’s attempt to have this country’s Jewish population deported were resisted by  Tsar  Boris  III.  One  dissident  from  this  country  was  murdered  in  the  Umbrella  Incident. This  home  of Georgi  Markov  was  ruled  by  communist  Todor  Zhivkov. Byzantine  Emperor  Basil  II  was  known  as  the “slayer” of this country’s people. For ten points, name this European country with capital Sofia.	ANSWER: Bulgaria
Esther Peterson opposed this legislation in favor of “specific bills for specific ills.” Support for it was  removed  from  the  Republican  platform  in  1980. Its  proponents  cite Coleman  v. Miller as  precedent allowing a “three-state strategy” for its adoption. A campaign against this legislation was led by the Eagle Forum’s Phyllis Schlafly, who worried it would discriminate against housewives. Alice  Paul  first proposed,  for  ten  points,  what  non-ratified  constitutional  amendment  that  would  outlaw  discrimination based on sex?	ANSWER: Equal Rights Amendment (or ERA)
As a teenager, this ruler put down a rebellion led by Jhujhar Singh. The Battle of Tilpat was a victory for this ruler, which resulted in the end of the Jat uprising led by Gokula. This ruler established a  system  of  law  known  as  Fatawa-e-Alamgiri. This  ruler  reinstated  the  jizya  tax  for  non-Muslims,  which had  been  abolished  by  Akbar  the  Great. This ruler’s mother was laid to rest in the Taj Mahal. For  ten points, name this Mughal emperor and son of Shah Jahan.	ANSWER: Aurangzeb  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016 Bowl Round 8 Page 2
This man’s rise to power was secured after the arrest of Osiel Cardenas. Early in his career, he broke an alliance with the Beltran Leyva, and his men accidentally killed the archbishop Juan Ocampos during a battle in Tijuana. This man prompted a federal reaction from Jose Calderon when his hit squad killed the head of the Juarez cartel in a shopping mall. After a second arrest, he escaped through a tunnel in July  of  2015. For  ten  points, name  this  leader  of  the  Sinaloa  cartel who  was  interviewed  by  Sean  Penn prior to his third arrest in 2016.	ANSWER: El Chapo or Joaquin Archivaldo G u zm ́an Loera
Members of this ruler’s court were tried for treason in the Merciless Parliament. One of this ruler’s supporters, Robert de Vere, was defeated outside of Oxford by the forces of the Lords Appellant. This ruler was succeeded by the son of John of Gaunt. This son of Edward the Black Prince attempted to collect poll taxes, leading to Wat Tyler’s Peasants’ Revolt. For ten points, name this last Plantagenet King of England who was forced to abdicate by Henry IV, leading to the War of the Roses.	ANSWER: Richard III of England
Future  governor  George  McDuffie  led  a  boycott  in  response  to  this  act.  It  was  unusually  proposed  by Southern  Democrats,  who  planned  it  to  be  voted  down  by  New  England  Whigs  opposed  to  its  impact  on wool  imports. This  protectionist  act  was  expected  to  be  repealed  with  the  defeat  of  John  Quincy  Adams. The South  Carolina  Exposition  and  Protest was  written  by  John  Calhoun  in  opposition  to,  for  ten  points, what  1828  tariff,  the  highest  ever  in  American  history,  which  triggered  the  Nullification  Crisis  four  years later?	ANSWER: Tariff of Abominations (accept Tarif f of 1828 before mentioned)
In 1995, seven hostages from this country were able to overpower their Taliban captors and fly home. During  another  hostage  crisis,  this  country  was  criticized  for  indiscriminately  flooding  a  theater  with poison gas. On “Knowledge Day” in 2004, terrorists demanding independence from this country occupied a  school  in  Beslan;  nearly  200  children  died  in  that  siege  in  North  Ossetia. For  ten  points,  name  this country, which controls Chechnya.	ANSWER: Russia
This work describes how discipline learned in a former home country was not needed in America in the section “The Dilemma of Virtue.” This work was criticized for over-reliance on interviews with Robert Hashima  and  people  kept  at  Manzanar  and  other  internment  camps,  as  its  author  could  not  travel to  the subject  country  during  wartime. Shame  culture  and  guilt  culture  were  compared  in,  for  ten  points,  what 1946 study of Japanese culture by Ruth Benedict?	ANSWER: The Chrysanthemum and the Sword
Despite  being  a  puppet  ruler,  Chao  Anouvong  led  a  revolt  in  this  modern-day country  against  one  neighbor,  though  he  was  captured  and  imprisoned  in  Bangkok.  This former  vassal  of  Siam  was  occupied  by  a  14th-century  kingdom whose  name  translates  to "one million elephants," the kingdom of Lan Xang. Champasak and Luang Prabang were two of  three  kingdoms  that  split  this  modern  country,  which  was  occupied  by  France  and incorporated into their Indochina colony. For ten points name this neighbor of Vietnam that became Communist following a mid-twentieth century civil war.	ANSWER: Laos (accept Lao People's Democratic Republic; or Sathalanalat Paxathipatai Paxaxôn Lao)
Author  Ken  Kesey  unknowingly  took  part  in  these  experiments  at the  Veterans Administration  Hospital  in  Menlo  Park  while  working  there  as  a  night  aide. One  revelation from hearings on this project was that Frank Olson, a U.S. Army biochemist, died from being covertly  dosed  by  an  experimental  drug  under  the  auspices  of this  program.  Originally designed   to   test   the   effects   of   psychoactive   drugs   on   eliciting   confessions   during interrogations,  for  ten  points,  give  the  codename  for  what  series  of  illegal  and  highly- secretive human experiments conducted by the CIA?	ANSWER: Project MKUltra
This  man's  grandfather  with  a  similar  name  was  pardoned  by  Martin  van  Buren after his violation of the Neutrality Act during the 1837 Upper Canada revolt. Heavy losses in the Dieppe Raid led to this leader instituting a national draft, leading to the Conscription Crisis of 1944. This longest serving prime minister of one country formally asked George VI permission to declare war on Nazi Germany. The leader of World War Two-era Canada was, for ten points, which Liberal prime minister?	ANSWER: William Lyon MacKenzie King (do not accept "William Lyon Mackenzie" alone)
Opponents  of  this  man  called  the  Erasistrateans  resisted  his  theory  that  blood flowed  through  arteries,  instead  wrongly  claiming pneuma did  so.  This  man's  records  of treating the Antonine Plague while in Aquileia [[ah-KWIH-leh-uh]] led historians to identify the  blight  as  smallpox.  This  man  had  his  theories  from On Anatomical Procedure untested for  a  millennium,  until  the  16th-century  human  dissections  of  Andreas  Vesalius.  For  ten points,  name  this  extremely  influential  Greco-Roman  physician  and  scholar  who  expanded the Hippocratic views on humors.	ANSWER: Galen (accept Aelius Galenus; or Claudius Galenus)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 9
During  this  war,  General  Abebe  Aregai  [[ah-REH-guy]]  failed  to  stop the  "March  of the  Iron  Will"  by  the  mechanized  columns  of  Pietro  Badoglio.  The  League  of  Nations  was discredited following the proposal of the Hoare-Laval Pact, which agreed Britain and France wouldn't  intervene  in  this  war.  Revanchist  tendencies  caused  by  the  1896  Battle  of  Adwa led to Mussolini organizing this war to created a unified "Italian East Africa." The deposition of  Haile  Selassie  occurred  as  a  result  of,  for  ten  points,  what  war  which  led  to  an  African nation's occupation?	ANSWER: Second Italo-Ethiopian War (or Second Italo-Abyssinian War; accept descriptive answers like Fascist Italy's Invasion of Ethiopia)
The killing of a sacred beast begins this nation's king-making ceremony, the Incwala, which  coincides  with  the  summer  solstice.  This  nation's  head  of  state  was  censured  by Amnesty  International  after  seizing  18-year-old  schoolgirl  Zena  Mahlangu  from  her  home. This nation's King Sobhuza II designed its flag, which depicts a black and white shield with multiple  spears  protruding  from  its  side.  For  ten  points,  name  this  tiny  kingdom  between South Africa and Mozambique, ruled since 1986 by Mswati III.	ANSWER: Kingdom of eSwatini (or Kingdom of Swaziland)
Merchant Harrison Gray Otis wrote Letters in Defense of [this meeting] while serving as overseer of Harvard University. Despite voting unanimously to not send a delegate to this meeting,  a  Vermont  county  sent  one  representative,  William  Hall  Jr,  anyway.  A  one-term presidential   limit   and   prohibition   of   lengthy   trade   embargos   were   proposed   at this convention  populated  exclusively  by  New  England  representatives.  The  Federalist  Party collapsed  following,  for  ten  points,  which  purportedly  treasonous  "Convention"  held  in  a Connecticut city?	ANSWER: Hartford Convention
This  Westerner  reintroduced  the  works  Alban  Berg  and  Arnold  Schoenberg,  which had been repressed during the Socialist Realist period, while on a 1950s tour of the Soviet Union.  While  conducting  Brahms  Piano  Concerto  No.  1  in  D  minor  for  this  man,  Leonard Bernstein  told  the  audience  he  assumed  "no  responsibility  for  what  they  were  about  to hear."  This  soloist,  who  was  known  for  eccentricities  such  as  humming  and  foot-tapping while  playing,  began  his  recording  career  with  a  set  of  30  contrapuntal  variations  Bach's Goldberg Variations. For ten points, name this Canadian pianist of the 20th century.	ANSWER: Glenn Gould (or Glenn Herbert Gould)  2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 9
According  to  Herodotus,  a  plan  suggested  by  this  client-king  led  to  the  death  of Cyrus  the  Great  while  in  battle  with  the  Scythian  Massagetae people.  This  king  undertook the  philosophical  discussion  known  as  "Which  man  is  Happy?"  with  the  Greek  sage  Solon, who  suggested  material  wealth  was  too  fickle  to  equate  to  happiness.  This  man's  wife supposedly killed herself after the fall of his capital, Sardis. The first minting of metal coins is credited to, for ten points, which extremely wealthy, semi-mythological king of Lydia?	ANSWER: Croesus (accept Krowiśaś; or Kroisos)
This  country  secured  its  independence  in  the  aftermath  of  Operation  Storm,  which included  the  retaking of Knin  and  the expulsion  of  many  Orthodox  Christians  from  Krajina [[krah-YEE-nah]].   During   World   War   Two,   a   Nazi   puppet   state   in   this   country   was dominated  by  the  Ustaše  [[ooh-STAH-sheh]].  This  country  sought  independence  from Hungary  and  unification  of  its  "Triune  Kingdom"  which  included  Slavonia  and  the  coastal Kingdom of Dalmatia. For ten points, name this former Habsburg territory and constituent country of Yugoslavia, governed from Zagreb.	ANSWER: Republic of Croatia (or Republika Hrvatska)   2021-22 A Set History Bowl - 2021-09-23  Round 9
This  man  created  a  copy  of  the  Peacock  Throne  to  decorate  the  House  on  Schachen.  The Herrenchiemsee  was  commissioned  by  this  man  as  a  miniature  copy  of  France’s  Versailles  Palace.  This man, known as the “Fairy Tale King,” constructed a Rococo palace at Linderhof and a castle on a hill that was inspired by the operas of Richard Wagner and which inspired Sleeping Beauty’s Castle in Disneyland. Neuschwanstein [noysh-van-stein]  was  built  by,  for  ten  points,  what  Bavarian  king  who  may  have  been insane?	ANSWER:LudwigII of Bavaria (accept Mad KingLudwig)
The  Great  Law  of  Peace  was  first  recorded  using  symbols  made  of  this  material,  and  a  Two  Row Treaty  made of  this  material was  signed  in 1613  with  the Dutch.  The  Hiawatha  Belt  was  made of  this material, which was made from quahog [ko-hog] shells collected from Long Island Sound or Narragansett Bay. In Iroquois Culture, this material represented a person’s authority and was often kept on a belt. For ten points, name this type of shell bead used in barter between Native Americans and early colonists.	ANSWER:wampum(prompt on beads and/or shells before mentioned)
One of this ruler’s generals won the Battle of Mons Graupius, but that general was dismissed from office, contributing to the Roman historian Tacitus’s hatred of this ruler. This man came to power after the short reign of his brother, and he was used as the archetype for despotic rule by later Roman historians. Agricola served, for ten points, what Roman Emperor, the second son of Vespasian and the last Flavian ruler?	ANSWER: Titus Flavius Caesar Domitianus Augustus
This  man  launched  a  series  of  modernizations  with  his  Vision  2020  program.  This  man,  a  former spymaster for the Ugandan military, worked alongside Uganda’s Yoweri Museveni to fund the ADFL and topple Mobutu Sese Seko in the First Congo War. After a conflict broke out with the death of Juvenal Habyarimana, this man’s troops recaptured Kigali from the Interwanhame to end a genocide perpetrated by Hutu paramilitary groups. For ten points, name this Tutsi leader and president of Rwanda.	ANSWER: Paul Kagame
The  preface  to  this  work  critiques  the  historians  Arnold  and  Creasy  for  slighting  the  topic  of  this work as a factor in Hannibal’s loss to Rome. This work, which was published by the president of a war college in Newport, advocates the creation of “resting-places” for “coal and repair” as “one of the first duties of government.” William McKinley’s management of the Spanish-American War was influenced by, for ten points, what expansionist book that uses history to argue for the development of a dominant navy, written by Alfred Thayer Mahan?	ANSWER: The InfluenceofSeaPowerUponHistory: 1660-1783 Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
Land sold and mortgaged by a member of this family was the subject ofBryan  v.  Kennett, the so called  “ratification”  of  the  Louisiana  Purchase  by  the  Supreme  Court.  Another  member  of  this  family fought Haden Edward’s Fredonian Rebellion and denounced Article 13 banning slavery. This family, which led  the  “Old  300”  asempresarios,  included  a  man  who  lost  an  1836  election  to  Sam  Houston.  For  ten points, name this family which includes Moses and his son, Stephen, the “Father of Texas.”	ANSWER: Austinfamily (accept StephenAustinor MosesAustin)
According to Edward Hall’s Chronicle, Lord Wenlock was killed with an axe during this battle after failing to support an allied force in the “Bloody Meadow.” After this battle, many soldiers drowned while trying to cross the Swilgate River. Edward of Westminster was executed after this battle, making him the only English heir apparent to die in battle. For ten points, name this 1471 victory for Edward IV over the Duke of Somerset that led to the capture of Margaret of Anjou.	ANSWER: Battle ofTewkesbury
This  leader  controversially  canceled  the  GSOMIA  intelligence-sharing  agreement  during  a  trade dispute with Japan. This man, who served in a support role during Operation Paul Bunyan, defeated Hong Jun-pyo in an election to succeed acting leader Hwang Kyo-ahn after a scandal involving the daughter of a shamanistic cult extorting bribes. The Singapore summit between Donald Trump and Kim Jong Un was mediated by, for ten points, what man who succeeded the impeached Park Geun-hye in 2017 as president of South Korea?	ANSWER: MoonJae-in
The  best-selling  book  of  Jules  Archer  focuses  on  this  conspiracy,  which  J.P.  Morgan’s  executive Thomas Lamont dismissed as “perfect moonshine.” One man claimed that Gerald MacGuire paid regular visits to his hotel room to discuss this conspiracy, which was investigated by the McCormack-Dickstein Committee. Hiram Johnson was to be installed as dictator as part of this conspiracy, which was detailed in Congressional testimony in 1934 by Major General Smedley Butler. For ten points, name this alleged conspiracy in which Franklin Roosevelt would have been overthrown by well-funded conspirators.	ANSWER: BusinessPlot(prompt on descriptions of a coup d’etat against FDR)
In  this  civilization,  the  high  priest  was  required  to  resign  upon  the  death  of  his  wife,  who  was responsible for the Argei rituals. A woman in this civilization was said to have dragged a statue of Cybele through a sandbar. This civilization operated a temple whose gates were closed during times of peace and opened  during  war.  The  two  faced  god  Janus,  Minerva,  and  Vulcan  were  worshiped  in,  for  ten  points, what civilization whose chief god was Jupiter?	ANSWER: ancient Rome(acceptRomanEmpire and/orRomanRepublic) Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
In this city, a dramatization of the novelThe Two Captainswas broken up at the start of a terrorist attack. Civilian casualties in this city escalated after troops refused to tell doctors what type of chemical weapon they had used, leading to the death of 130 hostages. The Spetsnaz special forces indiscriminately used poison gas to end a hostage crisis in, for ten points, what city where Chechen terrorists occupied the Dubrovka Theater in 2002?	ANSWER: Moscow
This general died in a battle in which the Arcadian League splintered. This man’s last words were legendarily  “I  have  lived  long  enough;  for  I  die  unconquered,”  and  he  noted  that  he  left  behind  an “immortal” daughter: a battle where he defeated Cleombrotus, Leuctra. This man’s death at the Battle of Mantinea essentially ensured that Philip II of Macedon would be able to conquer Greece. The Sacred Band fought for, for ten points, what massively successful Theban general?	ANSWER: Epaminondas
This man was forced to step down after the Rua Tonelero incident, in which an assassination attempt was launched on rival Carlos Lacerda. The Integralists were suppressed by this man after they advocated for fascism. This man declared he would “leave life to enter history” before shooting himself with a pistol. During his tenure, he established Petrobras and administered the South American Estado Novo period. For ten points, name this president of Brazil in the 1940s.	ANSWER: Getulio Vargas
This  owner  of  the  Poplar  Hall  plantation  wrote  that  the  “difficulty  of  establishing  particular manufactures [...] is almost insuperable” in the second entry of a series that this man published under the name “A Farmer.” This man’s most famous work was addressed to a king who refused to read it, instead proclaiming that the colonists had “proceeded to open and avowed rebellion.” For ten points, name this “Penman of the Revolution,” a founding father from Pennsylvania who drafted the Olive Branch Petition.	ANSWER: John Dickinson
In  a  work  by  this  man,  the  line  “either  I’m  nobody,  or  I’m  a  nation”  is  spoken  by  Shabine,  who later  comments  on  the  Middle  Passage.  This  man  lamented  about  the  bad  deeds  of  “Hawkins,  Walter Raleigh, [and] Drake” in another work, which notes that the “smell of dead limes” signifies the “leprosy of empire.” This poet described the sinking of theMarlboroughin a work in which Achille loves Major Dennis Plunkett’s servant, Helen. For ten points, name this Saint Lucian poet who wrote theIliad-inspired “Omeros.”	ANSWER: Derek Walcott Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
Fighting for this city included the second battle of the Odon and Verrieres Ridge. Defenses in this city  were  compromised  after  nearby  Saint  Lo  was  captured,  and  this  city  was  finally  abandoned  after Allied  troops  launched  Operations  Cobra  and  Spring.  Many  retreating  German  troops  were  trapped  in the Falaise Pocket after this city fell, paving the way for a push into central France. For ten points, name this city in Normandy that was contested for three months following D-Day.	ANSWER: Caen
After  the  president  of  a  neighboring  country,  Sylvanus  Olympio,  was  assassinated,  a  ruler  of  this country named Maurice Yameogo began removing government ministers. A ruler of this country fought the Agacher Strip war with its northern neighbor; that man was known as “the Che Guevara of Africa,” Thomas Sankara. A 2014 uprising in this country ousted Blaise Compaor ́e, who fled to the Ivory Coast. For ten points, name this landlocked African country where Roch Kabor ́e leads from Ouagadougou.	ANSWER:BurkinaFaso
One  of  these  events  sparked  unrest  in  Chicago  that  became  the  Battle  of  the  Viaduct  on  Halsted Street. One of these events which began in Martinsburg, Virginia led to the Shamokin Uprising and many other smaller actions. One of these events in 1922 occurred in response to wage cuts that notably did not affect  the  “Big  Four”  unions  in  its  industry.  A  “Great”  one  of  these  events  in  1877  lasted  for  45  days before being put down by federal troops across the country; that event targeted the B&O. For ten points, name this type of labor action, common in late 19th century America as transportation barons exploited workers.	ANSWER: railroadstrikes
This philosopher originated the image of a “tree falling in a forest” with nobody around to hear it as part of an argument that God must exist to percieve the whole universe at all times. That image, which later  reappeared  in  a  limerick,  comes  from  this  thinker’sTreatise  Concerning  the  Principles  of  Human Knowledge.  This  thinker  later  wrote  that  “to  be  is  to  be  perceived”  inThree  Dialogues  Between  Hylas and  Philonous. For ten points, name this “immaterialist” Anglo-Irish philosopher who lends his name to a university city in California.	ANSWER: Bishop George Berkeley([BARK-lee], but be lenient)
This doctrine was used in conjunction with the concept of “bad tendency” in the conviction of a man who published a “Left Wing Manifesto.” SinceBrandenburg  v.  Ohio, this doctrine has been replaced by the idea of “imminent lawless action.” This doctrine was introduced in an opinion that described the evils of “falsely shouting fire in a theatre.”Schenck v. U.S.originated, for ten points, what four-word doctrine by which justice Oliver Wendell Holmes described situations in which free speech was not protected by the Constitution?	ANSWER:clearandpresentdanger Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
In  an  effort  to  encourage  dental  health,  this  leader  encouraged  his  population  to  chew  on  bones because dogs do so. This leader renamed the month of September after his bookRuhnama, whose study is  required  to  obtain  a  driver’s  license  in  his  country.  This  leader  commissioned  the  construction  of  an Arch of Neutrality, which contained a golden statue of himself that rotated to face the sun in the city of Ashgabat. For ten points, name this totalitarian ruler of post-independence Turkmenistan from 1991 to his death in 2006.	ANSWER: Saparmurat Niyazov(orTurkmenbashi)
Allison  Janney  earned  an  Oscar  nomination  for  playing  this  woman’s  mother,  the  abusive  LaVona Fay Golden. This woman followed Midori Ito to become the second woman to ever land a triple axel, but became infamous when her ex-husband, Jeff Gillooly, conspired to attack her rival before the 1994 Winter Olympics. A 2017 film by Craig Gillespie stars Margot Robbie as, for ten points, what American figure skater and rival of Nancy Kerrigan?	ANSWER: Tonya Harding(accept Tonya MaxenePrice)
The fourth and final section of a book by this man incorrectly tries to explain the origins of Earth’s tides.  This  man  supported  one  of  his  arguments  by  citing  the  phases  of  Venus  and  apparent  motion  of sunspots. This man introduced the idea of inertial reference frames with a thought experiment about a man  below  deck  on  a  ship,  and  wrote  a  book  consisting  of  conversations  between  the  laymen  Sagredo, Simplicio, and Salviati. For ten points, name this author of aDiologue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, who was charged with heresy for supporting heliocentrism.	ANSWER: GalileoGalilei(accept either underlined name)
In  1910,  this  state’s  constitution  almost  incorporated  the  Digges  Amendment  to  disenfranchise African-Americans. Albert Ritchie governed this state for nearly 15 years in the early 20th century. With John  McDuffie,  a  Senator  from  this  state  co-sponsored  Filipino  independence.  This  state’s  flagship  law school was integrated afterMurray v. Pearsonwas argued by Thurgood Marshall, a native of this state. H.L. Mencken worked for a newspaper in this state when he covered the Scopes Trial in Tennessee. For ten points, name this state where Congressmen like Millard Tydings represented the city of Baltimore.	ANSWER: Maryland
An activist from this country mysteriously died while on a U-Boat heading towards his home country during  Operation  Dove.  During  World  War  II,  this  country  was  governed  by  the  Emergency  Powers Act  while  maintaining  official  neutrality.  The  SSLibauwas  intercepted  before  it  could  supply  arms  to supporters  of  an  uprising  in  this  modern-day  country.  Roger  Casement  was  executed  for  treason  as  a revolutionary for, for ten points, what country that was led by Eamon de Valera, who fought during the 1916 Easter Rising?	ANSWER: Ireland(orEire) Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
In a battle in this province, Zhang Shijie was tricked by music to think that the enemy had a banquet. The Battle of Yamen occurred in this southern province, where the Hong factories operated prior to the Opium Wars. The Pearl River Delta lies in this province, which borders the special administrative regions of  Hong  Kong  and  Macau.  The  most  populous  province  in  China  is,  for  ten  points,  what  region  that contains a city once known as Canton?	ANSWER: Guangdong
This  group  was  led  by  the  “Fighting  Parson”  John  Elder,  and  another  member,  Lazarus  Stewart, was killed in the Wyoming Massacre. John Penn placed a bounty on this group, who attacked victims in protective custody at Lancaster. Benjamin Franklin forced this group to disperse at Germantown. This group committed the Conestoga Massacre against the Susquehannock Indians. For ten points, name this group of Pennsylvanian vigilantes who acted against Native Americans in the wake of Pontiac’s Rebellion.	ANSWER:PaxtonBoys
Marie van Goethem worked in this profession and, at age 14, served as a model for a bronze sculpture with a wax-covered skirt. A bronze statuette of a girl wearing bangles was found in Mohenjo-daro in 1926 and is named for this assumed activity. This action is depicted in statutes of Shivanataraja, in which the god is encircled by a ring of fire with one leg raised. For ten points, name this activity depicted in Edgar Degas paintings of women practicing at the barre or performing in ballets.	ANSWER: dancing(accept  anything  related  todance,  includingballet;  accept  LittleDancerof Fourteen Years; acceptDancingGirl; accept CosmicDancerand similar)
This scientist led a task force that outlined plans for a permanent lunar base and a manned mission to Mars in a strategic initiative regarding “America’s Future in Space.” Donald Kutyna was leaked internal documents by this figure, who sat with him on the Rogers Commission. This astronaut was insultingly asked “Will the flight affect your reproductive organs?” before a mission aboard theChallenger. For ten points, name this astronaut, the first American woman in space.	ANSWER: Sally Ride
Byzantine  Emperor  Michael  VIII  claimed  in  his  autobiography  that  he  was  God’s  instrument  to save the people of this region. Pope Adrian IV agreed to the Treaty of Benevento with a ruler from this region. The Hauteville family established this region’s namesake kingdom under Roger II, whose daughter Constance eventually married Holy Roman Emperor Henry V. This island rebelled against the Angevin rule of Charles I during its namesake “vespers.” For ten points, name this kingdom primarily based on an island south of mainland Italy.	ANSWER: Kingdom of Sicily Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
In  2005,  this  figure  offered  his  resignation  to  Larry  Lucchino  and  walked  out  in  a  gorilla  suit.  In 2002, this man was hired for a job that had been turned down by Billy Beane, as described at the end of Moneyball. Tom Ricketts hired this man as President in 2011; with Jed Hoyer, this man brought Anthony Rizzo and Kris Bryant to Wrigley Field. For ten points, name this baseball executive who, as GM and President, ended the World Series droughts of both the Boston Red Sox and Chicago Cubs.	ANSWER: Theo Epstein
This  man  formulated  Operation  Paukenschlag,  part  of  a  military  plan  also  known  as  the  “Second Happy Time.” This man issued a command to disregard drowning sailors after the a B-24 bomber attacked a ship carrying survivors of theLaconia. This head of state under the Flensburg government pioneered “wolfpack”  tactics  in  the  Battle  of  the  Atlantic.  For  ten  points,  name  this  admiral  who  advocated  for unlimited U-boat warfare, then surrendered to the Allies after he was named Adolf Hitler’s successor as President of Germany.	ANSWER: Karl D ̈onitz
This battle was prompted by faulty intelligence that claimed one side was at Fort Ninety-Six. While attempting  to  taunt  the  enemy  commander,  William  Washington  had  his  horse  shot  out  from  under him.  In  this  battle,  John  Eager  Howard  helped  form  one  of  three  lines  of  defense  set  up  by  the  Broad River to repel an attack from the British Legion under Banastre Tarleton. For ten points, name this 1781 Revolutionary War victory for Daniel Morgan in South Carolina.	ANSWER: Battle of Cowpens
The action at the center of this case was first defined inStromberg  v.  California, while the ruling of Bethel  v.  Fraserwas held to be distinct from this case. Abe Fortas’s majority opinion in this case held that the action in question did not cause a disruption and that its participants did not lose their rights “at the schoolhouse gate.” This case dealt with five children who, in 1965, wore black armbands to protest the Vietnam War in Iowa. For ten points, name this Supreme Court case that protected students’ right to free speech.	ANSWER: Tinkerv. Des Moines (Independent Community School District)
This man worked to quell the revolt of Francis Rakoczi while working as president of the Imperial War Council. This man commissioned the Belvedere Palace after his victory at the Battle of Zenta, which led to the Treaty of Karlowitz and the Ottoman withdrawal from Central Europe. In 1704, this general joined up with the Duke of Marlborough to defeat the Duc de Tallard at the Battle of Blenheim. For ten points, name this Habsburg commander during the War of the Spanish Succession.	ANSWER: Prince EugeneofSavoy Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
One member of this family became the first woman appointed to the Harvard University faculty and fought typhoid in Chicago from Hull House. Another member of this family served as the Headmistress of the Bryn Mawr college prep school in Baltimore for 26 years, then detailed the “Timeless Tales of Gods and Heroes” in a 1942 work whose first section teaches about Greek creation myths. For ten points, name this family, including public health advocate Alice and classicist Edith, the author ofMythology.	ANSWER: Hamilton(accept Alice and/or EdithHamilton)
A  Western  offshoot  of  this  group  coalesced  around  “general”  Charles  Kelly.  Part  of  this  group under  William  Hogan  stole  a  Northern  Pacific  train,  prompting  Montana  marshals  to  intervene.  This group dispersed shortly after its leader was arrested for trespassing on the White House lawn. An Ohio businessman  led  this  group,  officially  called  the  Army  of  the  Commonwealth  in  Christ.  For  ten  points, name this group of unemployed workers that marched on Washington following the Panic of 1893.	ANSWER:Coxey’sArmy(  acceptArmyoftheCommonwealthinChristbefore  mentioned; “Army” not needed after mentioned)
At  this  location,  Ahmad  Abdali’s  forces  defeated  Sadashivrao  Bhau,  though  the  Durrani  Empire opted to retreat regardless. After a victory at Tughlaqabad, Hemu was killed at a battle in this location when Bairam Khan moved to reconquer Delhi. At one battle in this location, one ruler used araba carts to maximize the effect of his artillery against Ibrahim Lodi. For ten points, name this site of a 1526 victory for Babur that marked the beginning of the Mughal dynasty.	ANSWER: (Battle(s) of) Panipat
This mathematician names an exact solution to the Einstein field equation describing swirling dust. He spent time in a sanitarium for a nervous breakdown following the murder of Moritz Schlick by Johann Nelbock, who was pardoned after two years by the Nazis. This mathematician is best known for showing that axiomatic systems cannot prove their own consistency and that all axiomatic systems with a notion of arithmetic will contain unprovable truths. For ten points, give this mathematician who names a set of two incompleteness theorems.	ANSWER: Kurt G ̈odel
A city in this present-day country along the Irtysh River was the capital of the self-proclaimed Alash Autonomy and was the home of a facility nicknamed “The Polygon. The Semipalatinsk nuclear test site is in this country, as is a location leased until 2050 by its northern neighbor where Sputnik I was launched. This home of the Baikonur Cosmodrome moved its capital from Almaty in 1997. Astana is now the capital of, for ten points, what former Soviet republic, the largest landlocked country in the world?	ANSWER: Republic of Kazakhstan Page 2  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
The Mitterrand Doctrine provided amnesty for members of this group who had renounced violence. This  group  carried  out  its  most  famous  action  to  oppose  attempts  at  a  “historic  compromise”.   This group’s deadliest act was the bombing of the Central Train Station in Bologna.  Mario Moretti led this group,  which  primarily  operated  during  the  Years  of  Lead.   For  ten  points,  name  this  group  of  Italian communists who kidnapped and murdered Prime Minister Aldo Moro in 1978.	ANSWER: RedBrigades(orBrigateRosse)
This  empire  was  ruled  under  the  Kouroukan  Fouga  constitution,  which  established  the  Gbara legislature.  A victory at the Battle of Kirina solidified this empire’s rule over the Sosso leader Sumanguru. Chihab al-Umari documented the travels of one ruler of this empire, who supposedly built a mosque every Friday on his hajj to Mecca.  For ten points, name this West African empire that was founded by Sundiata Keita and led in the 14th century by Mansa Musa.	ANSWER:MaliEmpire
This successor of John Smith was investigated after his party accepted loans in exchange for peerage appointments in the Cash for Honours scandal.  This proponent of a “Third way” between capitalism and socialism  mediated  the  Good  Friday  Agreement,  which  ended  the  Troubles  in  Northern  Ireland.   This Prime Minister backed George W. Bush’s invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq.  For ten points,  name this “New Labour” Prime Minister of Great Britain from 1997 to 2007.	ANSWER: Tony Blair
This speaker noted “I want [slavery] root and branch destroyed” in an 1867 speech to the American Equal Rights Association that ended with a singing of “We are going home.” This speaker asked “Where did  your  Christ  come  from?”,  noting  “Man  had  nothing  to  do  with  Him!”  in  another  speech;  in  that speech, she proclaimed “I have plowed and planted, [...]  and no man could head me!” for ten points, name this 19th century activist and orator,  a former slave who repeated the question “Ain’t I a Woman?” in her most famous speech.	ANSWER: Sojourner Truth
Prokhorovka Cathedral commemorates the victory in this battle,  which was followed by the Third Battle  of  Kharkov.   The  Allied  invasion  of  Sicily  led  Heinz  Guderian  to  argue  that  Nazi  forces  should be  held  back  as  a  reserve  during  this  battle.   This  battle,  also  known  as  Operation  Citadel,  saw  the introduction of the Panzer tank as a counter to Soviet T-34s.  For ten points, name this most destructive aerial battle and largest tank battle in history, fought in 1943 near a namesake Soviet town.	ANSWER: Battle of Kursk Page 1  NHBB A-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 9
Due to costs, Canadian Prime Minister John Diefenbaker scrapped one of these technologies, the Avro Arrow.   One  example  of  this  technology,  which  crashed  in  a  Paris  exhibition  in  1973,  was  the  Tupolev Tu-144;  the only other commercial use of this type of vehicle ended after a 2000 disaster, also in Paris. The Bell X-1, piloted by Chuck Yaeger, was the first example of, for ten points, what type of aircraft that can surpass Mach 1?	ANSWER: supersonicaircraft (accept descriptions of an airplane that canbreakthespeedofsound, includingbreakMach1before it’s mentioned)
Abraham  Lincoln  responded  to  one  of  this  man’s  letters  by  explaining  “If  I  could  save  the  Union without freeing any slave, I would do it,” a few weeks before issuing the Emancipation Proclamation.  This author of the “Prayer of Twenty Millions” died a few weeks after he lost a Presidential election,  so his 66 electoral votes were split to other candidates.  The phrase “Go west, young man!” was popularized by, for ten points, what editor of the New York Tribune, who lost to Ulysses Grant in the 1872 Presidential election?	ANSWER: Horace Greeley
This  artist  depicted  one  of  his  subjects  wearing  the  Collar  of  Esses  livery  chain.   A  much-copied, though lost, work by this artist depicts his royal patron holding a glove in one hand and reaching for a dagger in the other.  He included a polyhedral sundial and a lute with a broken string in a double portrait best known for amemento morirendered in anamorphic perspective.  For ten points, what portraitist of Sir Thomas More and Henry VIII included a distorted skull inThe Ambassadors?	ANSWER: HansHolbeinthe Younger
This leader had a nuclear bunker built in the town of Gbadolite.  This leader was personally protected by  the  Special  Presidential  Division,  and  changed  his  name  to  refer  to  him  going  “from  conquest  to conquest, leaving fire in his wake” in the “Authenticity” campaign.  This ruler came to power at the end of a civil war sparked by the secession of the Katanga region, but Laurent Desire-Kabila overthrew him during the First Congo War.  For ten points, name this former dictator of Zaire.	ANSWER: MobutuSese Seko
Darwin  Judge  and  Charles  McMahon  were  killed  in  a  rocket  strike  on  this  city’s  airport.   Irving Berlin’s “White Christmas” was used to signal Operation Frequent Wind, which evacuated this city via airlift.  Helicopters were ditched into the sea to provide more room on aircraft carriers for refugees from this city, whose Tan Son Nhut airport was bombed starting on April 29th, 1975.  For ten points, name this South Vietnamese capital city, now named for Ho Chi Minh, whose fall marked the end of the Vietnam War.	ANSWER: Saigon(prompt on Ho Chi Minh City before his name is mentioned)
The   chief   religious   role   of   these   people   was   dispelling   chaos,   or isfet,   and maintaining  harmony,  or ma'at.  These  people  wore  the pschent crown,  representing  the northern  and  southern  portions  of  their  kingdom.  One  of  these  people  established  a monotheistic  religion  centered  on  the  sun  disk,  Aten.  These  rulers  were  believed  to  be human  incarnations  of  the  gods  Osiris  and  Ra.  For ten  points, name  these  kings  who  ruled Ancient Egypt.	ANSWER: Pharaoh (prompt on "King of Egypt" or similar answers)
An  ultranationalist  group  named  for  blue  examples  of  these  objects  supported Chiang  Kai-Shek’s New Life Movement. The Expedition of the Thousand was  conducted  by the  Red  [these  objects], who  followed  Giuseppe  Garibaldi.  A  1922  March  on  Rome  was  led by  Benito  Mussolini  and  his  followers,  nicknamed  for  black  [objects  of  this  type].  For  ten points, name this article of clothing whose “Brown” types were worn by the SA [[ESS-AY]].	ANSWER: Shirts [accept Blue Shirts; accept Red Shirts; accept Black Shirts; accept Brown Shirts; prompt on synonyms like "tunics" or "blouses")
This   man's   father   formed   a   short-lived   alliance   with   Murad   II   until   he   was imprisoned.  This  man  and  his  brother  Radu  were  jailed  as  children,  though  the  Ottomans released  him  after  an  invasion  of  his  homeland  by  John  Hunyadi.  The  envoys  of  this  man's childhood  friend,  Sultan  Mehmed  II,  were  impaled  on  stakes  by  this voivode [[VOY-vohd]]. The  ruler  of  independent  Wallachia  [[woh-LEH-kyuh]]  and  a  Romanian  national  hero  was, for ten points, what infamous warlord who inspired a vampire created by Bram Stoker?	ANSWER: Vlad the Impaler (or Vlad Tepes [[TEH-pesh]]; accept Vlad III; accept Vlad Dracula; or Vlad Drăculea; do not accept or prompt on "Vlad Dracul" NOTE: "Vlad Dracul" or "Vlad the Dragon" was Vlad the Impaler's father)
This  artist  depicted  a  chain  of  the  Order  of  the  Golden  Fleece  adorning  the  neck  of the  title  royal  in Philip IV in Brown and Silver.  One  of  this  man's  earlier  artistic  focuses  was on  scenes  from  the  kitchen,  as  shown  in  his  painting An Old Woman Cooking Eggs.  One  of this  man's  works  shows  the  ladies-in-waiting  of  La  Infanta  Margherita  in  the  court  of  her father. For  ten  points,  name  this  Spanish  Golden  Age  artist  who  created  the  painting Las Meninas.	ANSWER: Diego Velázquez (or Diego Rodríguez de Silva y Velázquez)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 1
Edward R. Murrow ran an episode of See It Now that criticized this politician for his interrogation  of  Annie  Lee  Moss.  This  man,  who  ran  for  Senate  on  the  slogan  "Congress needs a tail-gunner," was chastised by Joseph Welch with the question, “have you no sense of decency?” For ten points, name this Wisconsin senator who claimed to have a list of 205 known communists in the state department, driving the Second Red Scare.	ANSWER: Joseph McCarthy (or Joseph Raymond McCarthy; accept "Tail-Gunner Joe" McCarthy)
A  holder  of  this  position  became  the  highest-ranking  U.S.  official  to  visit  Antarctica in 2016, staying overnight at McMurdo Station. One of these people claimed the U.S. went to Afghanistan to "deal with the folks who attacked us on 9/11 and we have succeeded in that mission" in response to comparisons of the fall of Kabul with the capture of Saigon. Antony Blinken  and  John  Kerry  are  recent  Democrats  to  hold  this  office.  For  ten  points,  name  this position, the primary foreign minister of the United States.	ANSWER: Secretary of State (accept State Secretary)
Sixth   century   Byzantine   monks   established   a   pilgrimage   site   for   this   figure's purported burial site on Mount Nebo. While this figure was tending the sheep of his father- in-law, a bush caught fire without burning and told this man "I am who I am." This Biblical figure  caused  a  series  of  plagues  in  one  country,  and  he  parted  the  Red  Sea  in  Exodus  14. For  ten  points,  name  this  Biblical  prophet  who  delivered  the  Israelites  from  Egyptian slavery.	ANSWER: Moses (accept Moshe Rabbenu; accept Musa)
This  ruler's  armies  forced  the  Truce  of  Ratisbon,  which  ceded  Luxembourg  to  his country  and  concluded  the  War  of  the  Reunions.  This  monarch  survived  the  Fronde [["FROND"]]  Rebellion  in  his  youth  and  employed  the  engineer  Vauban  [[VOH-BAHN]]  to create  star  forts  along  his  country's  frontier.  This  king ordered  his  nobles  to  inhabit  the massive  Palace  at  Versailles.  For  ten  points,  name  this  "Sun  King"  of  France,  a  long-lived absolutist monarch.	ANSWER: Louis XIV [[the fourteenth[/a] (accept  (accept Louis the Great; or Louis le Grand; accept Louis, the Sun King or Louis, le Roi Soleil before "Sun King")
This  man's  skillful  turning  maneuvers  resulted  in  a  decisive  victory  at  Kennesaw Mountain,  which  Liddell  Hart  cited  in  calling  this  man  the  first  "modern  general."  While leading the Division of the Mississippi, this man's Special Field Orders No. 15 resulted in the phrase  "forty  acres  and  a  mule."  In  the  wake  of  the  Battle  of  Atlanta,  this  man's  forces undertook the "March to the Sea" to the Confederate port of Savannah. The "scorched earth tactic" was utilized by, for ten points, which Union general during the Civil War?	ANSWER: William Tecumseh Sherman  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 1
This  city  was  governed  by  a  constitution  known  as  the  Great  Rhetra,  written  by Lycurgus.  Children  in  this  city  ate  "black  soup"  and  were  forced  into  the  Agoge  [[ah-GOG- geh]] training system from the age of seven. Elected officials known as Ephors governed this city,  which  was  ruled  by  two  kings.  Ritual  killings  of  the  Helot  underclass  occurred  in,  for ten points, what militaristic ancient city state which rivaled Athens?	ANSWER: Sparta (accept Lacedaemon; or Laconike)   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 1
The 1st Texas Infantry lost over 80 percent of its men at this battle, the highest regimental casualty rate on either side of the entire war. George Anderson was one of six generals killed at this battle, having suffered a wound while defending the Bloody Lane. This battle, commonly known as Sharpsburg in the South, took place on September 17th, 1862 and resulted in over 22,000 casualties. For ten points, name this battle in Maryland, the bloodiest single-day battle of the Civil War.	ANSWER: Battle of Antietam(accept Battle ofSharpsburgbefore mentioned)
A disaster at this site forced nearby residents to move to the newly constructed city of Slavutych and prompted the construction of an iron sarcophagus to enclose this site. Sweden experienced an incidence of acid rain after a disaster at this site, which is now part of a zone of alienation. The Red Forest was created  and  Pripyat,  Ukraine  was  rendered  uninhabitable  by  the  failure  of,  for  ten  points,  what  Soviet nuclear power plant that melted down in 1986?	ANSWER: ChernobylNuclear  Power  Plant  (prompt  on  descriptions  of  a  zone  of  alienation  before mentioned; prompt on too-broad answers like Ukraine before “power plant” is read)
The  rituals  of  Annaprashana  and  Mamabhat  involve  feeding  rice  to  these  people.  In  Japan,  the holiday 7-5-3 involves giving these people haircuts. While teaching, Jesus said to bring these people to him and compared them to the ideal kind of faith. A group led by Thomas Muntzer argued against baptizing these people and was known as the Anabaptists. Naming ceremonies are held in honor of, for ten points, what type of people, one of whom is placed in a manger for Christian nativity scenes?	ANSWER: children (accept equivalents; acceptinfantorbaby)
In ancient Rome, a man known as the venatore would hunt these animals in herds as a spectacle for commoners.  The  ancient  Greek  class  ofhippeiswas  named  for  their  ownership  of  these  animals,  which were drowned in a river as an offering to Poseidon. Caligula supposedly planned to appoint one of these animals, Incitatus, as consul. Theequite[EK-wee-tay] class of Romans owned, for ten points, what animals used to pull chariots?	ANSWER: horses
On  February  3,  1977,  a  meeting  of  this  country’s  top  military  council  ended  in  a  shootout  where fifty-eight people died. That event kicked off this country’s Red Terror in which up to 500,000 people died and the military council, known as the Derg, emerged supreme. In 1983, a massive famine in this country led to international attention, including the Live Aid concerts. For ten points, name this African country that once controlled Eritrea on the Red Sea and has capital Addis Ababa.	ANSWER: Ethiopia Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
This  man  left  law  school  after  promising  Saint  Anna  that  he  would  change  careers  if  he  survived a lightning storm. Englishman William Tyndale was inspired by this man’s translation of the Bible into vernacular German. This man’s clashes with the ideology of Johann Tetzel led him to be brought before the Diet of Worms. For ten points, name this priest who protested the sale of indulgences by writing the 95 Theses, beginning the Protestant Reformation.	ANSWER: Martin Luther
A  work  by  this  composer  states  “we  cannot  escape  history,”  a  quote  from  a  State  of  the  Union address, and incorporates folk songs like “Camptown Races.” Another work by this composer used kettle and snare drums to depict a gunfight and quotes songs like “The Old Chisholm Trail.” A speech by Vice President  Henry  A.  Wallace  inspired  a  piece  by  this  composer  that  commemorates  ordinary  American soldiers in World War II. For ten points, name this composer of the balletsBilly the Kid,Lincoln Portrait, andFanfare For the Common Man.	ANSWER: Aaron Copland
This man was elected to the House in 1946 by labeling his opponent, Jerry Voorhis, a communist. This  man  won  a  Senate  seat  over  “the  Pink  Lady,”  Helen  Gahagan  Douglas,  in  1950,  but  served  less than a full term and resigned after successfully running for Vice President. He survived that campaign by delivering the “Checkers” speech. Dwight Eisenhower ran for President on a ticket with, for ten points, what politician who later won two Presidential elections but resigned after Watergate?	ANSWER: Richard Nixon
In  this  state,  Benjamin  Lincoln  surrendered  a  major  city  on  May  12,  1780  after  being  besieged by  British  forces  for  over  a  month.  Defensive  structures  made  of  palmetto  wood  foiled  British  naval bombardments at Fort Moultrie in this state. Daniel Morgan’s army routed Banastre Tarleton’s dragoons in  this  state  at  the  Battle  of  Cowpens.  Nathaniel  Greene  besieged  Camden  in,  for  ten  points,  what southern US state where the Americans surrendered Charleston?	ANSWER: SouthCarolina
During this war, two generals played a board game calledpetteiawhile, unknown to them, a battle raged around them. The Phrygian king Teleutas died in single combat during this war while fighting Ajax, son of Telamon. To avoid fighting in this war, a man pretended to be senile and plowed his field with salt, but gave up the ruse by swerving to avoid his baby son, Telemachus. For ten points, name this ancient war, the subject of Homer’sIliad.	ANSWER: TrojanWar Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
Blackbeard died on this state’s island of Ocracoke. Virginia Dare’s birth on an island in this state made her the first person of English descent born in the Americas. A carving of the word “Croatoan” was found on an island in this state’s Outer Banks that was home to a “Lost Colony.” Roanoke was found in, for ten points, what state whose capital was named after Sir Walter Raleigh?	ANSWER:NorthCarolina
One of these conflicts effectively ended with the capture of the Taku Forts. A letter that said, “Let us ask, where is your conscience?” was sent to the victorious monarch of these wars. One of these wars began  when  officials  boarded  and  searched  theArrow.  In  the  first  of  the  Unequal  Treaties,  Hong  Kong was ceded to the winner of these wars as part of the Treaty of Nanking. For ten points, name these 19th century wars in China over a British poppy export.	ANSWER: OpiumWar(s)
This  country  is  the  setting  of  a  novel  in  which  a  promise  to  watchPinocchiois  broken  when  Jalil refuses  to  see  his  estranged  daughter.  In  a  story  set  in  this  country,  Rasheed  is  angered  when  his  wife Miriam  asks  what  a  communist  is  at  the  start  of  a  revolution  against  Daoud  Khan.  This  setting  ofA Thousand Splendid Sunsserves as Amir’s home in one novel before he was forced to flee from a Soviet invasion. For ten points, name this country where Khaled Hosseini’sThe Kite Runneris set in Kabul.	ANSWER: Afghanistan
This  man’s  sister  Sophia  once  cut  a  hole  in  his  throne  to  whisper  advice  during  meetings.  Until the  death  of  his  half-brother,  this  man  jointly  ruled  with  Ivan  V.  This  man  learned  shipbuilding  in the Netherlands during his “Grand Embassy” tour of Europe. Modernizations under this man included the creation of a new capital on the Neva river. For ten points, identify this “Great” Russian tsar who westernized the country.	ANSWER: PetertheGreat(orPeterI; acceptPeteralone after “Great” is read)
One of these events that mainly affected Monterey and Santa Cruz Counties in 1989 temporarily cut off coverage of the World Series and began near Loma Prieta Peak. The Mission District burned in a fire that occurred after one of these events that destroyed the original flag used in the Bear Flag Revolt; that event was centered near the Golden Gate. For ten points, name these type of natural disaster that largely destroyed San Francisco in 1906.	ANSWER: earthquakes
The Aboriginal activist William Cooper protested this event by giving a petition to a consulate in Melbourne. Herschel Grynszpan’s assassination of the diplomat Ernst von Rath sparked this event, which included the burning of hundreds of buildings, including the Fasanenstrasse Synagogue. For ten points, name this 1938 pogrom in Germany whose name translates to “Night of Broken Glass.”	ANSWER: Kristallnacht(acceptNightofBrokenGlassbefore mentioned) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 2
A brand of these products temporarily stopped using green in its packaging during World War II, supposedly to save copper. Leo Burnett designed a mascot for a company that sold these products in an effort  to  transition  away  from  feminine  ad  campaigns;  that  mascot  was  a  cowboy  portrayed  by  several men who later died of COPD and other respiratory diseases. In 1970, the government banned television advertising for, for ten points, what cancer-causing product sold by Lucky Strike and Marlboro?	ANSWER: cigarettes (accept answers related totobacco)
In  the  final  scene  of  this  work,  a  blindfolded  child  waves  a  miniature  American  flag  and  the  title character reads the inscription “Who cannot live with honor must die with honor” on a knife. This work’s most  famous  aria,  “Un  bel  di  vedremo,”  describes  the  hope  of  seeing  a  puff  of  smoke  on  the  horizon signaling the return of Lieutenant Pinkerton. For ten points, name this opera by Giacomo Puccini whose title character, Cio-Cio San, lives in early 20th century Japan.	ANSWER:MadameButterfly(orMadamaButterfly)
This  one-time  head  of  the  “Radical  Division”  organized  COINTELPRO  to  spy  on  suspected communists, using the program to harass Martin Luther King. Associates of this man included secretary Helen Gandy, who burned his “personal file” after his death, and his deputy Clyde Tolson. The arrests of Machine Gun Kelly and “Public Enemy Number One” John Dillinger were coordinated by a group led by, for ten points, what influential first director of the FBI?	ANSWER: J(ohn) Edgar Hoover
A villa in Florence inspired the name of a map of this island known as the Castello Plan. Seyseys, the leader of the Canarsee, led a negotiation for this island. An artillery section built along the southern portion of this island was known as the Battery. Members of the Lenape tribe were supposedly given 60 guilders by Peter Minuit to transfer ownership of this island to the Dutch. For ten points, name this island of New York City that is home to Wall Street.	ANSWER: Manhattan
One  of  these  structures  named  for  Alexander  the  Great  is  known  for  its  red  color  and  found  near Gorgon.  After  the  Battle  of  the  Allia,  one  of  these  structures  was  built  and  named  for  Servius  Tullius; that structure was surpassed by the Aurelian line, built in the 3rd century AD. For ten points, name this type of defensive structure that was built by the Qin Dynasty to guard the northern border of China.	ANSWER:walls  (accept  GreatWallof  Gorgon;  accept  ServianWalls;  accept  AurelianWalls;  accept Great Wallof China; prompt on descriptions of defensive barriers; do not prompt on fort)
After dropping out of Reed College, this man audited a calligraphy class that inspired the “multiple typefaces” of one of his products. A Walter Isaacson biography of this man inspired a 2015 film in which Seth Rogen plays a colleague of this man, Steve Wozniak. After this man was kicked off the Lisa project, he  led  the  Macintosh  project  until  resigning  from  the  company  he  co-founded  in  1976.  For  ten  points, name this business icon and longtime CEO of Apple.	ANSWER: Steve Jobs
In 1976, George H.W. Bush took over a leadership role in this organization for slightly less than a year.  The  Family  Jewels  were  a  set  of  papers  about  this  organization.  This  agency  trained  a  group  of exiles called Brigade 2506, which was decisively defeated after an amphibious landing at the Bay of Pigs. For ten points, name this American organization, based in Langley, Virginia, that manages international espionage.	ANSWER: CentralIntelligenceAgency(orCIA)
A palace partially named for this color was the residence of British monarchs for most of the 16th and 17th centuries. William Adelin died in a disaster named after a ship of this color. The Ditchley Portrait shows  Queen  Elizabeth  wearing  an  outfit  of  this  color.  A  rose  of  this  color  was  used  to  symbolize  the House of York, as opposed to the red rose used by the House of Lancaster. For ten points, name this color of the chalk-laden Cliffs of Dover.	ANSWER: white(acceptWhitehall Palace,WhiteShip Disaster,whiterose,WhiteCliffs of Dover)
This  location  included  a  radar  station  at  Opana  Point,  which  was  staffed  by  Joseph  Lockard  and George Elliot. This facility includes Ford Island, Hickam Field, and Wheeler Field, where grounded aircraft were destroyed by Val bombers. This facility’s Battleship Row was home to the Pacific Fleet’sOklahoma andArizona. For ten points, name this American naval base on Oahu that was attacked on December 7th, 1941.	ANSWER: Naval Station PearlHarbor(accept descriptive answers, such as “the naval base atPearl Harbor”; prompt on Hawaii, Oahu, and/or Honolulu before “this facility” is read) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
This man’s Special Field Order Number 15 provided for the confiscation of land along the Atlantic coast to be allotted among freed slaves, which became the basis for the saying “Forty Acres and a Mule.” This  commander  presented  25,000  bales  of  cotton  to  Abraham  Lincoln  as  a  Christmas  gift  when  he captured Savannah in December 1864, the culmination of a campaign of total war. For ten points, name this Union general who captured Atlanta to begin his “March to the Sea.”	ANSWER: William Tecumseh Sherman
Two of these figures, Mushka and Pchyolka, were purposely killed in 1960 to prevent foreign powers from inspecting their vehicle. Strelka, another of these figures, gave birth to a child named Pushinka who was given as a gift to John F. Kennedy in 1961. The most famous of these animals was locked in a box for weeks of training and died of overheating after a separation failure, having completed four orbits aboard Sputnik 2. Laika was one of, for ten points, what trained animal cosmonauts?	ANSWER:  Sovietspacedogs(accept  descriptive  answers  of  “thedogs  that  the  USSR  launched  into space; prompt on partial answers, such as “dog” or “Soviets” or “Russians” or “cosmonaut” or “astronaut”)
Laryngeal  examples  of  these  constructs  are  generally  not  found  within  the  English  language.  The dropping  of  the  voiceless  glottal  fricative  type  of  these  constructs  took  place  during  the  13th  century. The place and manner of articulation are typically both given when categorizing these constructs, which differ from a similar construct in that they require a complete or partial closure of the vocal tract. For ten points, name these linguistic constructs that are often contrasted with vowels.	ANSWER: consonants
A group of people protesting Dick Wilson’s corruption occupied this site under the direction of Russell Means in 1973. Stephen Vincent Benet’s poem “American Names” references this location, noting “I shall not be there. I shall rise and pass. Bury my heart at” this location. This site in the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation was the location of a violent episode when Black Coyote refused to surrender his rifle to U.S. troops. For ten points, name this site of an 1890 massacre of Lakota Sioux.	ANSWER: WoundedKnee(accept  Bury  My  Heart  atWoundedKnee;  acceptWoundedKnee Massacre; prompt on Pine Ridge Reservation before mentioned)
This cause was supported by Horace Greeley’s pamphlet “Prayer of Twenty Millions,” which urged enforcement of the Confiscation Acts. People who proposed secession and opposed this cause were called Fire-Eaters. William Lloyd Garrison burned a copy of the Constitution because it failed to support this cause, which he advocated for inThe Liberator. For ten points, name this cause that was achieved via the 13th Amendment and the Emancipation Proclamation.	ANSWER: abolitionof slavery (accept word forms; accept any answers related tofreeingslaves) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
The title character of this novel proves to a companion that he fought in World War I by producing a medal from Montenegro, shortly before he meets with Meyer Wolfsheim, who claims to have fixed the 1919  World  Series.  This  novel’s  narrator  moved  to  Long  Island  in  order  to  learn  the  bond  trade  and attends lavish parties thrown by the title character, who is hopelessly in love with Daisy Buchanan. For ten points, name this Jazz Age novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald.	ANSWER: The GreatGatsby
After the ruling of this case, Calvin C. Chafee and Taylor Blow provided protection for the plaintiff. Justices  McLean  and  Curtis  dissented  in  this  7-2  ruling,  after  which  Stephen  Douglas  formulated  the Freeport  Doctrine.  The  Missouri  Compromise  was  deemed  unconstitutional  by,  for  ten  points,  what controversial 1857 Supreme Court case that determined slaves could not sue in court because they were not U.S. citizens?	ANSWER: Dred Scottv. John F.A. San(d)ford
The  TORCH  report  investigated  the  health  impacts  of  this  event,  which  caused  the  deaths  of numerous  pine  trees  in  the  “Red  Forest.”  An  iron  sarcophagus  was  built  to  mitigate  the  aftereffects  of this  event,  which  triggered  a  high  rate  of  thyroid  cancer  among  former  citizens  of  Pripyat.  This  event was discovered after an incidence of radioactive rain in Sweden. For ten points, name this 1986 nuclear disaster at a Ukrainian power plant.	ANSWER: Chernobyldisaster   (accept   any   additional   information,   like   “nuclear   meltdown   at Chernobyl,”  etc.;  prompt  on  answers  that  describe  a  nuclear  disaster  without  mentioning  Chernobyl specifically)
The  primary  melee  weapon  used  by  warriors  of  this  empire  has  a  name  translating  as  “hungry wood.”  Commoners  in  this  empire  could  become  eagle  warriors  within  this  empire.  It  participated  in highly ritualistic Flower Wars with its neighbors, and arose from an alliance of Tlacopan, Texcoco, and Tenochtitlan. Montezuma ruled, for ten points, what Mesoamerican empire that practiced human sacrifice and was conquered by Hernan Cortes?	ANSWER: Aztecempire
A  member  of  this  family  was  injured  in  a  1908  accident  that  killed  Lieutenant  Thomas  Selfridge. A  business  formed  by  this  family  merged  with  the  Curtiss  company  in  1929  and  is  still  active  today. Members of this family formed a bicycle company in 1892 in Dayton, Ohio. On December 17, 1903, near Kitty  Hawk,  North  Carolina,  two  members  of  this  family  launched  a  plane.  For  ten  points,  name  this family of American aviation pioneers that included Orville and Wilbur.	ANSWER: Wright(or theWrightBrothers) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
Giovanni Schiaparelli published a map of this body that included “canali.” TheVikingprobes of the 1970s explored this planet, whose equator contains the Tharsis Montes. Ray Bradbury names the landing point for theCuriosityRover on this planet. In September 2016, SpaceX released promotional videos for its plan to send humans to, for ten points, what “red” planet, the fourth from the Sun?	ANSWER:Mars
This country’s Albay Province contains a volcano known for being a “perfect cone,” Mayon Volcano. Typhoon  Diding  hit  this  nation  at  the  same  time  another  volcano  erupted  here,  in  the  second-largest eruption  of  the  twentieth  century.  The  capture  of  its  Corregidor  Island  by  Japan  in  World  War  II  led Douglas MacArthur to proclaim “I will return.” This home country of Mount Pinatubo was the site of the Bataan Death March on Luzon, its largest island. For ten points, name this Asian country whose capital is on Manila Bay.	ANSWER: the Philippines
The Bing Nursery School at this university provided subjects for Walter Mischel’s study on delayed gratification  using  marshmallows.  This  school’s  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy  is  the  most  extensive  of  its type online, and its law school produced Supreme Court justices like William Rehnquist and Sandra Day O’Connor. Philip Zimbardo operated a notorious prison experiment at, for ten points, what private West Coast university founded by a namesake railroad tycoon?	ANSWER: StanfordUniversity
This man co-sponsored a bill with John McCain that led to the establishment of USAspending.gov. This  man  wrote  an  essay  inGlamourfor  his  55th  birthday  describing  the  reasons  why  he  became  a feminist.  This  man’s  first  signed  bill  into  law  was  The  Lilly  Ledbetter  Fair  Pay  Act.  This  politician’s two  Portuguese  Water  Dogs  are  named  Bo  and  Sunny.  For  ten  points,  name  this  politician,  the  first African-American Editor-in-Chief of the Harvard Law Review, who defeated Mitt Romney for re-election in 2012.	ANSWER: Barack Obama
This man ended the Iberian War in modern-day Georgia by signing a treaty of “Eternal Peace” with the Sassanid ruler Khosrau I. This man’s army reconquered Ravenna from the Ostrogoths thanks to the tactics of Belisarius. The Nika Riots forced this leader to dismiss his advisor Tribonian, who had helped this man issue a legal codex. For ten points, name this husband of Theodora, a Byzantine emperor who ordered the construction of the Hagia Sophia.	ANSWER: JustinianI(orJustiniantheGreat) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
In  Strasbourg  in  1988,  this  leader  proposed  a  non-nuclear  “zone  of  peace”  that  banned  Chinese immigration to his homeland.  This winner of the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize currently lives in Dharamshala, India, having fled after a 1959 uprising was put down by the Chinese.  This man was chosen as the 14th to hold his position at the age of 2 as the reincarnation of Thubten Gyatso.  For ten points, name this exiled religious figure, the leader of Tibetan Buddhism.	ANSWER: the 14th DalaiLama(or Jetsun Jamphel Ngawang Lobsang YesheTenzinGyatso)
On  the  campaign  trail,  this  politician  struggled  to  answer  questions  about  a  golf  trip  with  Paula Parkinson.   This  politician  claimed  that  Murphy  Brown’s  role  as  a  single  mother  hastened  America’s moral  decline  a  month  prior to  misspelling  potato  as a  spelling  bee  judge.   In a  debate,  Lloyd  Bentsen stated that this man was “no Jack Kennedy”.  For ten points, name this oft-criticized vice president who served under George H.W. Bush.	ANSWER: James Danforth “Dan”Quayle
This man and Mario Amaya were shot by the author of the SCUM Manifesto in 1968.  This man’s creation of 15 images of a totaled car sold for $105 million in 2013.  This artist ofSilver Car Crashdirected a  film  of  the  Empire  State  Building  over  the  course  of  six  hours  and  made  numerous  silkscreen  images of bottles of Coca-Cola, Campbell soup cans, and other consumer goods.  The Factory was the primary studio of, for ten points, what American pop artist?	ANSWER: Andy Warhol(or AndrewWarhola)
This  man  relaxed  his  troops  by  noting  the  presence  of  his  soldier,  Gisgo,  at  one  of  his  victories. This man lost his right eye while travelling over the Apennines and the Arno to reach one of his battles, where his forces defeated the army of Gaius Flaminius.  The Fabian strategy was used to delay this man’s forces, and after his victory at the Battle of Cannae he was finally defeated at the Battle of Zama by his chief rival, Scipio Africanus.  For ten points, name this Carthaginian general who fought Rome during the Second Punic War.	ANSWER: HannibalBarca (do not accept Hasdrubal)
PETA has protested a ritual held one day before this holiday in which a chicken is swung over the head, then donated to charity.  The Ne ́ılah is read on this day, the tenth of Tishrei, which includes five prayer services and fasting.  In 1973, this holiday was marred by a surprise attack in the Sinai Peninsula by Egypt against Israel.  For ten points, name this Jewish Day of Atonement, the holiest day of the Jewish year.	ANSWER: YomKippur(orDayofAtonementbefore mention) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 2
A rebellion against Ottoman incursions into this modern-day country in the late 1400s was led by the nobleman Skanderbeg.  An Italian invasion during the buildup to World War II ended monarchical rule in this nation under King Zog, and this Southeast European country was ruled for much of the Cold War by the Communist regime of Enver Hoxha [HAW-ja].  For ten points, name this Balkan nation whose capital is Tirana.	ANSWER: Republic ofAlbania(or Republika eShqiperise)
This author wrote the short stories “The Sing-Song of Old Man Kangaroo” and “How the Leopard got His Spots.” The title character of one of this man’s works is used as a pawn in the “Great Game” between Russia and Britain, and a poem by this man encourages a certain group of people to “send for the best ye breed”.  For ten points, name this Victorian author of “The White Man’s Burden,”Kim, and Just-So Stories.	ANSWER: Rudyard Kipling(or Joseph RudyardKipling)
This president tried to send John Slidell to negotiate the purchase of territory in modern New Mexico. He  sent  Nicholas  Trist  to  negotiate  a  treaty  that  replaced  the  Nueces  River  with  the  Rio  Grande  as  a national border and ended the Mexican-American War.  For ten points, name this “dark horse” president during whose term the United States gained territory in present-day California.	ANSWER: James K. Polk
This man claimed to feel “nothing” after returning from exile following the White Revolution.  In one speech, he referred to the United States as the “wounded snake” and the “Great Satan.” This leader’s objections to the novelThe Satanic Versesled him to issue a fatwa against author Salman Rushdie.  For ten points, name this Shia Islamic cleric who replaced Reza Pahlavi in the 1979 Iranian Revolution.	ANSWER:  Ayatollah Khomeini(accept  RuhollahKhomeini;  accept  ImamKhomeini;  prompt  on Ayatollah)
Sybil Ludington is nicknamed the “female” counterpart of this figure. William Dawes and this man were given similar tasks by Joseph Warren. This man’s most famous act occurred  on “the  eighteenth  of  April,  in Seventy-Five”  and  is  the  subject of  a  Henry Wadsworth Longfellow poem that states "one if by land, and two if by sea." For ten points, name this silversmith who warned of approaching British troops during a “midnight ride.”	ANSWER: Paul Revere
One  of  these  structures  built  by  the  Axumite  Kingdom  was  taken  to  Rome  but returned  to  Ethiopia  after  Italy  signed  a  UN  agreement.  The  earliest  known  type  of  this object  was  comprised  of  120  metric  tons  of  red  granite,  and  was  meant  to  commemorate Senusret  I  in  Heliopolis.  These  structures  were  said  to  symbolize  the  sun  god  Ra  and  are topped  with  a  pyramid-shaped  capstone.  For  ten  points,  name  this  type  of  tall,  four-sided, monument from Ancient Egypt.	ANSWER: Obelisks
In  this  nation,  Paul  Schäfer  [[SHAY-fer]] led  an  agrarian  community  known  as Dignity Colony that doubled as a post-war refuge for Nazis. The economic policy of a regime in  this  nation  was  influenced  by  the El Ladrillo [[lah-DREE-yoh]]  study,  first  published  by the  "Chicago  Boys."  A  left-wing  leader  likely  killed  himself  while  defending  this  nation's Moneda  [[moh-NEH-dah]]  Palace.  Augusto  Pinochet  [[pee-noh-SHEH]]  took  power  in  a 1973 coup in, for ten points, what South American nation?	ANSWER: Republic of Chile (accept República de Chile)
A painting of this ruler in his study shows a clock in the background at 4:13 a.m and a law code on a table. Paul Delaroche [[deh-lah-ROHSH]] painted a more realistic version of a painting where the names of Charlemagne and Hannibal can be seen on rocks below this leader.  That  painting  by  Jacques-Louis  David  [JAHK  LOO-wee  DAH-veed]]  shows  this  ruler crossing  the  Alps.  For  ten  points,  name  this  French  Emperor  depicted  at  battles  like Austerlitz and Waterloo.	ANSWER: Napoleon Bonaparte (or Napoleon I of France)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 2
In this ecosystem, deaths attributed to the mountain pine beetle created ladder fuels that  resulted  in  a  1988  wildfire.  Drawings  and  paintings  from  the  Hayden  Expedition  and the photographs of William Henry Jackson helped make the case for this place's status. The 4900  bison  which  live  here  comprise  a  namesake  herd  that  is  the  largest  in  the  United States.  In  March  1872,  the  first  national  park  status  was  granted  to,  for  ten  points,  what Wyoming-centered home of Old Faithful?	ANSWER: Yellowstone National Park
An ancient Indo-European example of these systems from the Vučedol [[VOO-cheh- dol]] culture in Croatia was based on Orion. According to a popular myth, the institution of one  of  these  systems  by  Chesterfield's  Act  in  1750  resulted  in  riots  around London. Examples  of  these  systems  in  Europe  are  named  for  Julius  Caesar  and  Pope  Gregory  XIII [[the  thirteenth]].  For  ten  points,  name  these  systems  used  to  organize  time  into  lunar months.	ANSWER: Calendar (accept Vučedol calendar; accept Julian calendar; accept Gregorian calendar)
This  man's  manager,  "Colonel"  Tom  Parker,  stopped  him  from  playing  Tony  in  the 1961   film   adaptation   of West   Side   Story.   Ed   Sullivan   initially   declared   this   man's performances   "unfit   for   family   viewing"   after   witnessing   his   "gyrations"   during   a performance on the Milton Berle Show. In 2019, the city of Memphis funded an expansion of this man's estate, Graceland. The "King of Rock n' Roll" was, for ten points, what Tennessee singer of Hound Dog" and "Heartbreak Hotel"?	ANSWER: Elvis Presley (or Elvis Aaron Presley; accept either underline portion)
This man used the proceeds from his Lancaster Caramel Company to start his most famous  business.  This  man  built  a  namesake  "Industrial"  boarding  school  in  a  company town  he  established in Pennsylvania in 1903. During World War Two, this man’s factories produced "Ration D Bars," a special type of confectionary designed to resist melting. For ten points, name this American founder of a chocolate bar and confectionary company.	ANSWER: Milton Snavely Hershey
The  only  known  recording  of  this  man  is  him  repeating  the  first  line  of  "La Marseillaise"  in mocking French. The  Ems Dispatch  was  purposefully  released  to  the  press by this man to discredit the government of Napoleon III. This minister annexed the province of  Alsace-Lorraine  following  the  Franco-Prussian  War.  The  rise  of  Wilhelm  II  led  to  the deposition of, for ten points, which "Iron Chancellor" who masterminded the unification of Germany?	ANSWER: Otto von Bismarck (accept Junker Otto Eduard Leopold von Bismarck; accept Otto, Prince of Bismarck, Count of Bismarck-Schönhausen, Duke of Lauenburg; or Otto Fürst von Bismarck, Graf von Bismarck-Schönhausen, Herzog zu Lauenburg)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 2
This  man  was  able  to  flee  Nazi  Germany  after  his  consultation  and  analysis  of  the royal Princess Marie Bonaparte led to a lifelong friendship between the two. The heiress to Tiffany  &  Co.,  Dorothy  Burlingham,  was  in  a  relationship  with  this  man's  daughter  and fellow psychoanalyst, Anna. This man developed the idea of the id, ego, and superego, which were founding ideas of psychoanalysis. For ten points, name this Austrian psychologist who wrote The Interpretation of Dreams.	ANSWER: Sigmund Freud (or Sigismund Schlomo Freud)   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 2
During this period, a diplomatic snub toward the ruling government led to the Seikanron debate over a  potential  invasion  of  Korea.  The  Charter  Oath  laid  out  the  ideals  of  this  period,  which  proved  to  be unacceptable to a Satsuma-based group of warriors due to provisions abolishing the practice of feudalism. For ten points, name this period following the Tokugawa Shogunate that featured Western modernizations under a namesake emperor of Japan.	ANSWER: MeijiRestoration (acceptMeijiEra)
One  of  these  events  was  named  “Irma’s  Injection”  and  was  used  to  formulate  the  idea  of  wish fulfillment.  According  to  one  theorist,  these  events  contain  manifest  and  latent  content  that  should  be analyzed  through  therapy.  That  theorist  wrote  a  book  titledThe Interpretation ofthese  events,  which examined several of these events experienced by the patients of that theorist, Sigmund Freud [FROYD]. For ten points, name these nocturnal events, examples of which include nightmares.	ANSWER: dreams (accept equivalents, such asnightmares before it is mentioned)
A failed campaign against this man’s troops was bogged down by heavy river quagmires and called the  Mud  March.  This  man  rose  to  prominence  after  the  Battle  of  Seven  Pines,  where  Joseph  Johnston was wounded. Shortly after fighting a series of defensive battles at Spotsylvania and the Wilderness, this man spoke at Appomattox Courthouse with Ulysses S. Grant. For ten points, name this commander of the Army of Northern Virginia whose surrender ended the American Civil War.	ANSWER: Robert E. Lee
A Defense Minister of this country said “it is hard to search for a black cat in a dark room, especially if it’s not there” about the presence of soldiers in a neighboring country. The leader of that neighboring country, Viktor Yanukovych fled to this country after the Euromaidan protests. Soldiers from this country were termed “little green men” and dismissed as being militiamen despite taking Donbass for this country. For ten points, name this country that annexed Crimea in 2014 under Vladimir Putin.	ANSWER: Russia
In  1939,  half  of  the  United  States  moved  this  holiday  a  week  earlier,  causing  a  controversy  that wasn’t  resolved  until  a  1941  act  of  Congress.  Sarah  Josepha  Hale  helped  convince  Abraham  Lincoln  to proclaim this holiday as a federal holiday in 1863. The inspiration for this holiday was an event attended by  members  of  the  Wampanoag  tribe  like  Massasoit  and  Squanto  in  1621.  For  ten  points,  name  this holiday celebrating the first harvest of the Pilgrims in late November.	ANSWER: ThanksgivingDay Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 3
This  period  roughly  began  with  the  establishment  of  the  United  Provinces,  and  it  included  the creation ofUnequal LoveandThe Propositionby Judith Leyster. Schutterstuks likeThe Meagre Company by  Frans  Hals  and  a  painting  of  the  company  of  Frans  Banning  Cocq  were  popular  during  this  period. The  Mauritshuis  museum  in  the  Hague  collects  paintings  from  this  period,  like  those  of  Vermeer  and Rembrandt.  For  ten  points,  name  this  seventeenth-century  period  of  great  cultural  success  in  the Netherlands.	ANSWER: DutchGoldenAge(acceptGoudenEeuwDutch; prompt on partial answers)
A weapon that made use of this object was conceptualized by Hermann Oberth and was studied by Nazi engineers at Hillersleben who predicted they could build it within 100 years. A large black stone in reverence  to  this  object  was  taken  to  the  Palatine  Hill  by  Elagabalus,  whose  name  derives  from  a  cult surrounding this object. During the siege of Syracuse, Archimedes designed a “death ray” that used this body to destroy enemy ships through concentrated heat. Louis the 14th was nicknamed the king of, for ten points, what star?	ANSWER: the Sun(prompt on mirrors)
In  a  Hopi  creation  myth,  a  grandmother  figure  named  Koyangwuti  created  one  of  these  things  to bring the world into existence. In Jewish and Islamic traditions, respectively, one of these things blocked the entrance to a cave, preventing King David or Muhammad from being captured. The original dream catchers  were  likely  inspired  by,  for  ten  points,  what  items  that  Arachne  was  condemned  to  weave  in Greek myth?	ANSWER: spiderwebs (prompt on “silk” before mentioned)
This  group  was  weakened  after  repeated  attacks  by  Albert  of  Mecklenburg’s  privateers  and  the Victual Brothers. As a result of the Treaty of Stralsund, Valdemar IV agreed to give this group control of the fish trade. This group’s cog ships helped carry out trades with outposts like the Steelyard, Visby, and Novgorod. Lubeck became known as the crown jewel of this group’s guilds. For ten points, name this German union that dominated medieval European trade.	ANSWER: HanseaticLeague(orHansa)
Preludes to this event included the El Encanto arson and a feint towards Baracoa by theSanta Ana. The president allegedly wanted to “splinter the CIA in a thousand pieces” after their failure in this event. Brigade 2506, a force composed of exiles trained in Guatemala, was tasked with carrying out this event, which  prompted  its  target  to  ally  with  the  Soviet  Union.  John  F.  Kennedy  authorized,  for  ten  points, what 1961 failed invasion of Cuba?	ANSWER: BayofPigsinvasion Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 3
This  emperor’s  attempts  to  permanently  relocate  to  Alexandria  led  Cassius  Chaerea  to  scheme against him. This man may have caused a famine when he relocated grain ships to form a pontoon bridge between Puteoli and Baiae. This man’s successor was found hiding behind a curtain after the Praetorian Guard stabbed this man thirty times. Claudius succeeded, for ten points, what Roman emperor who was accused of naming his favorite horse consul, among other insane acts?	ANSWER: Caligula(acceptGaiusJulius Caesar AugustusGermanicus)
This man was accused of staging a standardization demonstration by Merritt Smith in order to buy more  time  to  fulfill  a  government  order  for  15,000  muskets.  This  man  worked  with  Honore  Blanc  and Louis de Tousard to produce widely-used artillery pieces, an early concept of interchangeable parts. His most famous creation revolutionized the Southern economy by allowing for the easy removal of seeds from a certain cash crop. For ten points, name this inventor of the cotton gin.	ANSWER: Eli Whitney
JME  McTaggart  formulated  two  possible  conceptions  of  this  concept,  the  A-series  and  B-series,  in his work on the “Unreality” of this concept. Martin Heidegger’s magnum opus argued that this concept was “the horizon of being” and was titled forBeing andthis concept. Philosophical positions about this concept include presentism and eternalism. For ten points, name this philosophical concept which pertains to the past, present, and future.	ANSWER: time(accept The Unreality ofTime; accept Being andTime)
This  man  spent  two  weeks  in  the  hospital  before  an  event,  causing  Richard  Daley  to  cry  “they’ve embalmed him before he even died!” Dwight Eisenhower said “If you give me a week, I’ll think of one” contribution by this politician. This man’s 5 o’clock shadow and sickly frame hurt his performance in the first televised presidential debate against John F. Kennedy in 1960. For ten points, name this politician who recovered to win the 1968 and 1972 elections.	ANSWER: Richard Nixon
Description acceptable. James Bradley notes that one participant of this event was shot by a sniper less than a month after this event; that man is Frank Sousley. Felix Wheldon used a depiction of this event for the Marine Corps War Memorial. Ira Hayes and Rene Gagnon were among the six people involved in this event, which Joe Rosenthal photographed at Mount Suribachi. For ten points, name this 1945 event in which the American colors were hoisted above a Japanese island.	ANSWER: the raisingof the AmericanflagonIwoJima(accept equivalents that include all 3 parts; accept MountSuribachiin place ofIwoJimabefore it’s mentioned; prompt on partial answers, including Battle of Iwo Jima) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
This  group  was  hurt  by  constant  raids  by  the  Victual  Brothers  against  their  signature  cog  ships. Though  this  group  lost  influence  when  the  Steelyard  was  closed  in  England,  they  forced  Valdemar  IV to force the Treaty of Stralsund to gain greater trading rights in Denmark. This group was centered on Lubeck and formed by merchant guilds around North Germany. For ten points, name this Baltic merchant alliance active in the 14th century.	ANSWER: HanseaticLeague(orHansa)
A group of these people were tried at Destrehan after trying to seize New Orleans during the German Coast rebellion. Mosby Sheppard convinced James Monroe to use the Virginia militia against a group of these people led by Gabriel Prosser. These people were prohibited from learning to read or write in many states after Nat Turner led a rebellion. For ten points, name this class of people who were the subject of the Emancipation Proclamation, which freed them.	ANSWER: Americanslaves (prompt on African(-American)s; prompt on black people)
In  1929,  Leonard  Woolley’s  team  of  archaeologists  found  four  examples  of  this  type  of  musical instrument in the ruins of Ur. A Samuel BarberAdagio forthis type of instruments was JFK’s favorite piece of classical music and was widely broadcast after his assassination. Plectra, picks, or bows may be used to play, for ten points, what class of musical instruments that includes guitars and violins?	ANSWER: stringinstruments (acceptlyres and/orharps; accept Adagio forStrings after “Samuel” is read)
This site was allegedly built in a single night to serve as housing for Ket Mealea. A new capital was established at the Bayon after this site was sacked by the Cham people. Completed by Jayavarman VII, this site was constructed to resemble India’s Mount Meru. This site was dedicated to Vishnu, but it was later converted into a Buddhist temple. A national flag depicts, for ten points, what Cambodian temple complex?	ANSWER: AngkorWat
This war included the controversial hanging of members of the St. Patrick’s Battalion for desertion. The Spot Resolutions were Abraham Lincoln’s Congressional attempt to discover the spot where American troops were shot near the Nueces[nu-AY-sis] River in the leadup to this war. This war ended with the Treaty  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo,  which  gave  California  to  the  winners.  For  ten  points,  name  this  war  in which the United States prevailed over its southern neighbor.	ANSWER:Mexican-AmericanWar Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
This  ruler  gained  control  of  Burgundy  in  the  Treaty  of  Madrid  shortly  after  defeating  his  rival  at Pavia.  He  won  the  Battle  of  Muhlberg  against  the  Schmalkaldic  League  while  attempting  to  halt  the Reformation in Germany, but eventually allowed for some religious autonomy in the Peace of Augsburg. This  ruler  summoned  Martin  Luther  to  the  Diet  of  Worms.  For  ten  points,  name  this  16th  century monarch who served as both King of Spain and Holy Roman Emperor.	ANSWER: CharlesV, Holy Roman Emperor (acceptCarlosIof Spain orCharlesIofSpain, but don’t prompt on Charles I alone; prompt on Charles or Carlos)
An aristocrat boards a train bound for this region to follow the woman he loves, a prostitute who was tricked into giving a womanizing merchant a lethal dose of arsenic. This region is the setting of the later parts of the novelResurrection. Sonya Marmeladova travels to this region near the end ofCrime and Punishment.  For  ten  points,  name  this  region  to  which  Raskolnikov  is  exiled  to  complete  a  sentence  of eight years of hard labor.	ANSWER: Siberia(prompt on (Eastern) Russia)
Production  ceilings  in  this  industry  were  upheld  inWickard v. Filburn.  Workers  in  this  industry demanded fair railroad rates after organizing as the Grange. The US imported labor for this industry via the Bracero Program. Dolores Huerta coined the slogan “si, se puede,” which was used by a union in this industry led by Cesar Chavez. For ten points, name this industry whose workers migrated to California to escape the Dust Bowl, despite claims that its plowing would lead to rain.	ANSWER: agriculture(acceptfarming and other equivalents)
A thunderbird replaced a yellow version of this symbol on a red diamond as the insignia of the 45th Infantry  Division,  which  consisted  of  National  Guardsmen  from  the  American  southwest.  This  symbol, whose name derives from Sanskrit for “auspicious,” was used by the Thule Society, which supported the DAP,  or  German  Worker’s  Party.  For  ten  points,  name  this  four-armed  symbol,  common  in  numerous religious traditions, that was adopted by the Nazi Party.	ANSWER: swastika(accepttetraskelion; accepthakenkreuzorhookedcross; acceptfylfot; accept tetra gammadion; do not accept or prompt on cross alone)
One  of  the  causes  of  this  rebellion  was  the  selective  distribution  of  trade  contracts  by  the  Long Assembly.  Thomas  Larimore  led  a  group  of  ships  dispatched  to  fight  this  rebellion,  which  ended  when its  namesake  leader  died  of  dysentery.  The  perceived  pro-Native  American  stance  of  governor  William Berkeley incited this rebellion, whose agitators burned Jamestown to the ground in 1676. For ten points, name this first major rebellion in colonial Virginia.	ANSWER: Bacon’s Rebellion Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
People who were not in one of these organizations revolted in Florence during the Ciompi[chomp-ee] Revolt. An alliance of these organizations formed a trading league in the Baltic Sea called the Hanseatic League.  Some  members  of  these  organizations  progressed  from  apprentices  to  journeymen  to  master craftsmen. For ten points, name these town-based medieval associations of merchants and skilled laborers.	ANSWER:guilds
After this man’s first campaign, commemorative monuments were carved in rock at the Dog River north  of  modern-day  Beirut.  Early  in  this  leader’s  reign,  he  defeated  the  Sherden  sea  pirates.  At  the Orontes River, this ruler fought the Hittite King Muwatallis in the largest chariot battle in history. This successor of Seti I constructed the temple complex at Abu Simbel and inaugurated that temple alongside his wife, Nefertari. For ten points, name this pharaoh who won the Battle of Kadesh.	ANSWER: RamessesII(acceptRamessestheGreat; acceptOzymandias; prompt on Ramesses)
A leader of this religion named James Strang established a controversial “kingdom” on Beaver Island in  Lake  Michigan  in  the  mid  19th  Century.  A  leader  of  this  religion  founded  the  territorial  capital  of Fillmore after his plans to found the state of Deseret fell through. Members of this religion were led to Nauvoo, Illinois by Joseph Smith and then to Salt Lake City by Brigham Young. For ten points, name this religion whose members founded the Utah Territory.	ANSWER: Mormonism (accept word forms; accept the Church (of Jesus Christ) ofLatterDaySaints; acceptLDS)
A  type  of  these  items  named  for  Rule  144  must  be  acquired  in  unregistered  form.  Privately  held companies use IPOs to initiate the sale of these items. Preferred types of these items grant earlier dividends than their common form, which allows for voting rights in decisions. For ten points, name these financial instruments that are sold on namesake exchanges and which represent ownership of a corporation.	ANSWER:stocks (accept any additional information, such as preferredstocks; prompt on securities)
An 1889 attempt to build a railway along this location ended when Frank Brown drowned exploring it. John Powell named this location after leading the first American expedition to its ground floor. The glass-bottomed  “Skywalk”  is  maintained  by  the  Hualapai  tribe  in  this  location,  which  was  regarded  as sacred by the ancestral Pueblo that first inhabited it. The Colorado River formed, for ten points, what 277-mile long canyon in Arizona?	ANSWER: GrandCanyon Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
This battle ended an invasion whose leader, seeking revenge for the Ionian Revolt, had an assistant constantly tell him “Master, remember the Athenians.” Datis and Artaphernes were the losing commanders at this battle, which frustrated Darius the Great. News of this battle was swiftly delivered to Athens via Pheidippides[fuh-dip-ih-dees], a runner. For ten points, name this Greek victory, commemorated today with a 26 mile run.	ANSWER: Battle of Marathon
After tackling and beating a man named Wesley, this figure quipped “Sorry I had a fight in the middle of  your  Black  Panther  meeting.”  After  a  Viet  Cong  bombing,  this  man  rescued  Lieutenant  Dan  and Bubba, acting against his girlfriend Jenny’s advice to “run.” The advice “life is like a box of chocolates” is given by the mother of, for ten points, what 1994 film character, played by Tom Hanks, who inexplicably experiences much of 20th century American history?	ANSWER: ForrestGump(accept either or both)
Many  holders  of  this  profession,  including  the  Qawasmi,  operated  in  the  Trucial  States  on  a  coast named  for  this  profession.  One  holder  of  this  profession,  Hayreddin  Barbarossa,  later  became  Pasha  of Algeria. Stephen Decatur was forced to burn thePhiladelphiain the first of several Barbary Wars, which were fought by the United States against North African holders of this profession. For ten points, name this  profession,  commonly  practiced  in  modern-day  Somalia,  in  which  individuals  steal  valuables  from ships.	ANSWER: piracy(accept word forms)
Objects undergoing this process were sometimes dried out using the chemical natron or naturally by extreme cold. The byproducts of one stage of this process were often stored in canopic jars decorated with animals  like  jackals  and  baboons.  Anubis  was  the  god  of  this  technique,  which  involves  a  final  step  of wrapping in linen bandages. For ten points, name this type of embalming that was common for pharaohs of ancient Egypt.	ANSWER: mummification(accept descriptions like “creatingmummies”)
The  losers  of  this  battle  were  induced  into  a  mass  panic  known  as  the  Runaway  Scrape.  During  a meeting in this battle, William Travis drew a line in the sand and allowed all who stepped across to leave. Davy Crockett and Jim Bowie were among the 200 defenders of a San Antonio mission who died in this 1836 battle. For ten points, name this victory for the Mexican army, inspiring a Texan call to “remember [this battle].”	ANSWER: Battle of the Alamo Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 3
This figure stands next to Saint Barbara and Saint Sixtus in a Sistine painting by Raphael. When shown with another religious figure on her lap, this figure is known as the “Seat of Wisdom.” Scenes of the Annunciation show the angel Gabriel entering the house of this woman and her husband Joseph. For ten points, name this religious figure, known in Italian art as Madonna, and often shown holding her son, Jesus Christ.	ANSWER: the VirginMary(accept either or both; acceptMadonnabefore mentioned, do not accept or prompt on Mary Magdalene)
This president affirmed the right to intervene in South American relations in his namesake corollary and  sent  the  Great  White  Fleet  around  the  world  to  showcase  American  naval  power.  This  man,  who claimed to “speak softly and carry a big stick,” broke with William Taft, and ran in the election of 1912 with  the  Bull  Moose  party.  For  ten  points,  name  this  early  20th  century  president  who  appears  with Lincoln, Jefferson, and Washington on Mount Rushmore.	ANSWER: TheodoreRoosevelt(acceptTeddyRoosevelt; prompt on Roosevelt)
In 1995, this organization’s LEAR created the nine atoms of anti-hydrogen, the first true antimatter. This group’s AWAKE plasma experiment uses equipment and space once dedicated to the “Neutrinos to Gran Sasso” project. In 2012, scientists with this organization announced experimental data suggesting the finding of the Higgs boson. For ten points, name this research organization, based near Geneva, that operates the Large Hadron Collier.	ANSWER: CERN(or  theEuropeanOrganizationforNuclearResearchor  theOrganisation europ ́eenpourlaRechercheNucl ́eaire)
During this battle, Davy Gam died while leading a band of knights in defense of his monarch. This battle was preceded by a lengthy siege of Harfleur. During this battle, the English used stakes to protect their archers from opposing cavalry and used longbows to devastating effect as the French cavalry trudged through a muddy battlefield. For ten points, name this victory for Henry V during the Hundred Years’ War.	ANSWER: Battle of Agincourt
This  speech  presents  a  metaphor  between  an  island  of  poverty  and  an  ocean  of  prosperity  and claims that the government’s promissory note has been returned with an “insufficient funds” stamp. This speech’s final section begins by claiming that freedom should ring through every valley and every hamlet and closes with the repeated declaration “Free at last!” For ten points, name this 1963 speech delivered during the March on Washington by Martin Luther King.	ANSWER: IHaveaDreamspeech  (prompt  on  descriptive  answers,  such  as  “(MLK’s  speech  during the) March on Washington” Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 3
This man created a system of “burhs” for the defense of his kingdom, which eventually became known as “boroughs”.  This man’s forces were attacked at Chippenham, which saw him retreat to Athelney.  This man’s life was chronicled by Bishop Asser,  and he converted the Danish king Guthrum to Christianity. For ten points, name this Anglo-Saxon king of Wessex in the 800s AD, the only English king to be given the epithet “the Great”.	ANSWER: Alfredthe Great (orAlfredI)
The Maori base their new year on the appearance of one star cluster in this constellation, to which the Parthenon is also oriented.  In 1054, the first object cataloged by Messier appeared in this constellation, whose alpha star was named by Arabic astronomers for its following of the Pleiades.  The Crab Nebula and  Aldebaran  are  found  in  this  constellation,  which  has  been  identified  as  Marduk,  Nandi,  and  Io  by various myth systems.  For ten points, name this constellation, depicted by many ancient civilizations as a bull.	ANSWER: Taurus
This  author  wrote  “no  more  time’s  dark  events  /  charging  like  ceaseless  clouds  across  the  sky”  in his elegy “Hush’d Be The Camps To-Day.” This man’s service as a volunteer nurse for the Union Army inspired  the  collectionDrum-Taps,  and  he  wrote  an  elegy  in  which  “the  great  star  early  droop’d  in the  western  sky”.   For  ten  points,  what  poet  eulogized  Abraham  Lincoln  in  “When  Lilacs  Last  In  The Dooryard Bloom’d” and “O Captain!  My Captain!” from his collectionLeaves of Grass.	ANSWER: Walt Whitman(or WalterWhitman)
This leader ordered the genocidal Operation Anfal, carried out by Ali Hassan al-Majid; that operation included an attack on Halabja, where thousands of Kurdish people were killed by poison gas.  This man was captured near Tikrit in a “spider hole” nine months after the U.S. invaded his country in 2003.  For ten points, name this Ba’ath Party leader, the former dictator of Iraq.	ANSWER: SaddamHussein
The destruction of Port Dover was used as an excuse to attack this city, but a hurricane allowed the defending side to move back from Brookeville.  Robert Ross led the military force that attacked this city, following his success at the Battle of Bladensburg.  Paul Jennings recounted Dolley Madison’s efforts to save the portrait of George Washington from a burning building in this city.  For ten points, name this city, burned by British troops near the end of the War of 1812.	ANSWER: WashingtonD.C.(accept either) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 3
This  man  attempted  to  divest  responsibility  for  causing  a  peasant  war  by  writingAgainst  the Murderous,  Thieving  Hordes  of  Peasants.  He was sheltered by Frederick the Wise at Wartburg Castle, where he translated the New Testament into German.  This man debated Ulrich Zwingli at the Marburg Colloquy  and  opposed  the  indulgences  granted  by  men  like  Johann  Tetzel.   For  ten  points,  name  this father of the German Protestant Reformation.	ANSWER: Martin Luther
This artist’sThe Battle of the Kearsarge and the Alabamashows the Battle of Cherbourg during the American Civil War.  This artist painted a nude woman looking toward the viewer while lounging next to a black cat and a black servant inOlympia.  Raphael’sJudgement  of  Parisinspired this man’s painting of a nude woman who sits next to two fully clothed men at a picnic.  For ten points, name this artist of Luncheon on the Grass.	ANSWER: EdouardManet
This  event  disrupted  plans  to  create  a  utopian  society  known  as  New  Helvetia.   Newspaper  owner Samuel Brannan heavily promoted this event, which led Levi Strauss to sell dry goods and denim overalls. This event was started after James Marshall made a discovery at Sutter’s Mill, and it led to the growth of San Francisco.  For ten points, name this economic event in which “forty-niners” traveled to California.	ANSWER: CaliforniaGoldRush
One construction in this city was covered with lapis lazuli and adorned with aurochs and dragons, symbolizing  Adad  and  Marduk.   Another  construction  in  this  city  was  legendarily  built  because  Queen Amytis  missed  her  Median  homeland’s  hills  and  greenery.   For  ten  points,  name  this  site  of  the  Ishtar Gate, a Mesopotamian city where Nebuchadnezzar II built the Hanging Gardens.	ANSWER: Babylon
The “imminent lawless action” test was formed after Clarence Brandenburg, a member of this group, sued the state of Ohio.  The first leader of this organization was a general whose forces committed the Fort Pillow Massacre.  A revival of this group at Stone Mountain took place after it was depicted suppressing voters in D. W. Griffith’s filmBirth  of  a  Nation.  Nathan Bedford Forrest helped found, for ten points, what white supremacist organization?	ANSWER: KuKluxKlan
A  pilot  from  this  nation  unwittingly  earned  a  one-hundred  thousand  dollar  prize from  the  U.S.  Air  Force  when  he  turned  over  of  a  Soviet  MiG-15  fighter.  Hatchet-wielding soldiers from this nation killed American servicemen in the Joint Security Area, to which the U.S. responded by mobilizing an entire taskforce to cut down a poplar tree in Operation Paul Bunyan. The Demilitarized Zone is shared between a southern neighbor and, for ten points, what East Asian nation dominated for seven decades by the Kim family?	ANSWER: North Korea (accept Democratic People's Republic of Korea; or Chosŏn Minjujuŭi Inmin Konghwaguk; or DPRK; accept DPR Korea; accept Bukhan; prompt on partial answer)
This   man   piloted   a   Gonzalo   Coelho   [[koo-EL-hoh]]   voyage   to   Brazil   which encountered  its  discoverer,  Pedro  Cabral.  This  Florentine  worked  for  merchant  Gianotto Berardi,  who  was  an  early  investor  in  the  1492  Columbus  expedition.  The  cartographer Martin  Waldseemüller  [[VAHLD-zee-MEW-luh]] was  influenced  by  the  Soderini  letter  to name  a  landmass  for  this  explorer.  For  ten  points,  what  Italian  navigator,  who  is  credited with  coining  the  term  "New  World,  is  the  namesake  of  two  continents  in  the  western hemisphere?	ANSWER: Amerigo Vespucci
The   winning   side   of   this   battle   issued   Order   Number   227   before   its   start, commanding  soldiers  to  take  "not  a  step  back."  Mamayev  [[MAH-mah-yev]]  Kurgan  and Pavlov’s House were heavily contested locales during this battle. Romanian and German forces  in  this  battle  were  encircled  by  Operation  Uranus,  led  by  Georgy  Zhukov.  For  ten points, name this battle where Friedrich Paulus’s Sixth Army failed to take a city on the Volga named for the leader of the Soviet Union.	ANSWER: Battle of Stalingrad
Polish forces deployed an armored variant of this product known as the "FT-B" in an effort  to  repel  a  Russian  invasion  during  the  1920  Polish-Soviet  War.  The  creator  of  this product joked that you can have it "any color, so long as it is black" during a board meeting. This  was  the  most  sold  automobile  of  the  early  20th  century.  The  "Tin  Lizzie"  was  a nickname  for,  for  ten  points,  which  first  mass-produced  car  created  by  the  Ford  Motor Company?	ANSWER: Ford Model T (prompt on "Tin Lizzie" before mentioned; prompt on "Ford" before mentioned)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 3
Dirt   brought   from   this   state   was   used   to   bury   the   Marquis   [[mahr-KEE]]   de Lafayette  in  Paris.  The  storming  of  this  state's  Springfield  Armory  occurred  during  Shays' Rebellion,   an   uprising   of   disenchanted   Revolutionary   War   veterans.   Israel   Putnam legendarily said "Don't fire 'til you see the whites of their eyes" at a 1775 engagement with the  Redcoats  in  this  state.  The  Battle  of  Bunker  Hill  occurred  in,  for  ten  points,  what  New England state?	ANSWER: Massachusetts
This  figure held  1960s  jazz  concerts  in  his  backyard,  including  acts  like  Dave Brubeck   and   Dizzy   Gillespie,   to   raise   funds   for   the   Southern   Christian   Leadership Conference.  This  founder  of  the  Black-owned  Freedom  National  Bank  was  defended  by teammate Pee-Wee Reese by saying "You can hate a man for many reasons. Color is not one of  them."  The  first  Black  man  to  break  the  color  barrier  in  Major  League  Baseball  was,  for ten points, which Brooklyn Dodgers baseball player?	ANSWER: Jackie Robinson (or Jack Roosevelt Robinson)
The outbreak of the Austro-Turkish war forced this composer to move from Vienna to  Alsegrund.  This  man  employed  his  own  sister-in-law  Josefa  Weber  [[yoh-SEH-fah  VEH- buh]] to perform the role of Queen of the Night in one opera. The marriage of the Emperor's niece led to the city of Prague commissioning this composer's Don Giovanni. The Marriage of Figaro and The  Magic  Flute were  written  by,  for  ten  points,  which  German-language composer of the 18th century?	ANSWER: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (accept Johannes Chrysostomus Wolfgangus Theophilus Mozart)
Roy Choi created a popular variety of these objects in southern California known as Kogi. A variety of these objects that often frequent construction sites are known as “roach coaches.” In accordance with its roots, a popular New England variety of these objects called Roxy’s sells a product known as the Green Muenster. These objects may have grown out of the  chuck  wagon.  In  the  1970s,  Raul  Martinez  pioneered  the  use  of  these  objects  to  sell tacos. For ten points, name these vehicles where one can grab a meal.	ANSWER: Food Trucks (prompt on "truck(s)")
Frederick  Jackson  Turner's  Frontier  Thesis  claims  "American  Democracy"  was  not established   on   this   object   or   the Susan   Constant.   The   springing   of   a   leak by   the accompanying Speedwell led  to  William  Bradford  deciding  to  solely  use  this  ship  for  a western   voyage.   A   rudimentary   government   for   Plymouth   known   as   its   namesake "Compact"  was  signed  on  this  vessel.  For  ten  points,  name  this  ship  that  transported  the Pilgrims to the New World.	ANSWER: Mayflower  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 3
William  Hogarth  depicted  a  young  merchant  wasting  his  money  in  this  city  and eventually being placed in its Fleet Prison in A Rake's Progress. Waterloo Bridge and Charing Cross Bridge are included in Claude Monet's scenes from this city, which include a series on the Houses  of  Parliament.  Canaletto  painted The  Thames  and  the  City depicting,  for  ten points, which English capital city that contains the Tate Modern?	ANSWER: London   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 3
This leader’s cause was damaged by constant feuds with Li Zongren over control of the army. This man was forced to form the Second United Front with his enemies after he was kidnapped in the Xi’an [shee-ahn] incident. This man’s wife, Soong Mei-Ling, tried to promote the “four virtues” during the New Life Movement. For ten points, name this successor of Sun Yat-sen, a Kuomintang leader who set up his base in Taiwan after losing the Chinese Civil War.	ANSWER: ChiangKai-Shek (acceptJiangJieshi)
Authors like William Simms and Caroline Hentz wrote works in a genre named for their opposition to this novel. The title character of this novel was inspired by Josiah Henson, who wrote two autobiographies detailing his life after he fled to Canada. Many southerners rebutted this novel by claiming it misrepresented friendly relationships between masters and slaves. For ten points, name this 1852 novel by Harriet Beecher Stowe.	ANSWER: UncleTom’sCabin, or Life Among the Lowly
The  Croatian  War  began  at  one  of  these  locations  called  Maksimir  following  a  fight  between  a police officer and Zvonimir Boban. One of these places in Croke became the site of an infamous massacre perpetrated  by  British  troops  on  Bloody  Sunday.  TheSunnewspaper  was  effectively  banned  from  one city  after  it  erroneously  claimed  that  the  Hillsborough  disaster  at  one  of  these  facilities  was  caused  by onrushing  Liverpool  fans.  For  ten  points,  name  these  places  where  teams  like  Arsenal  and  Manchester United play football.	ANSWER: soccer stadiums
The command to conduct this event was allegedly caught on audio tape by Terry Strubbe. This event, which  may  have  been  caused  by  people  throwing  rocks  at  a  patrolman’s  Jeep,  was  witnessed  by  John Filo, who took a photograph of Mary Ann Vecchio kneeling next to Jeffrey Miller’s body. The President’s Commission  on  Campus  Unrest  was  created  in  the  wake  of,  for  ten  points,  what  tragedy  in  which  the Ohio National Guard opened fire on Vietnam War protesters?	ANSWER: KentStateshootings
At one battle, this ruler urged his men never to “lose sight of my panache” and noted that they were “on  the  road  to  honor  and  victory.”  This  man,  who  defeated  the  Duke  of  Mayenne  at  Ivry,  was  killed by Fran ̧cois Ravaillac. The Guise faction in the French Wars of Religion was opposed by this king, who protected Protestant rights by proclaiming the Edict of Nantes. For ten points, name this first Bourbon king of France who was a Huguenot before he converted to Catholicism, declaring “Paris is well worth a mass.”	ANSWER: HenryIVof France (acceptHenryIIIofNavarre; prompt on “Henry;” do not accept or prompt on “Henry III” alone) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 4
A thinker from this country wroteDialectical and Historical Materialism, which laid the groundwork for this country’s political ideology. In the bookOur Revolution, another thinker from this country argued against  another  thinker  from  here  with  the  idea  of  a  “permanent  revolution.”  One  early  leader  of  this country outlined his political philosophy in the “April Theses.” For ten points, name this former country, whose political thinkers included Leon Trotsky, Joseph Stalin, and Vladmir Lenin.	ANSWER: SovietUnion(orUSSR; orUnionofSovietSocialistRepublics; acceptCCCPorSoyuz SovetskikhSotsialisticheskikhRespublik; prompt on Russia; prompt on Georgia; prompt on Ukraine)
In  a  publicity  stunt,  Andrew  Carnegie  led  an  elephant  across  this  city’s  Eads  Bridge  to  prove  the stability  of  the  steel  used  in  its  construction.  This  city’s  Forest  Park  hosted  the  1904  World’s  Fair.  A national park in this city, which was formerly called the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial, contains a massive steel catenary designed by Eero Saarinen. The Gateway Arch is in, for ten points, what large city in eastern Missouri?	ANSWER: St.Louis
A commander in this battle claimed that out of control Ho-Chunk allies started the attack. Despite being shot in the head and both thighs in this battle, Spier Spencer continued to command his Yellow Jackets. The victorious general in this battle succeeded in destroying Prophetstown and, twenty-nine years later, used his fame from this battle to win the Election of 1840. Shawnee forces were defeated in Indiana in, for ten points, what 1811 battle that gave William Henry Harrison a nickname used in his campaign with “Tyler, too”?	ANSWER: Battle ofTippecanoe
One of these events divided its participants into “new” and “old” lights based on their fervor. Another of these events led Charles Finney to describe western New York as the “burned over district.” Samuel Davies was a leader of one of these events, during which humanity was compared to a spider hanging over a fire in the “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God” sermon of Jonathan Edwards. For ten points, name these periods of American Christian religious revival.	ANSWER: First and/or Second GreatAwakenings (prompt on partial answers)
This man claimed that he drew from the general theory of relativity to create a new religion called Universalism.  This  man  came  to  power  after  a  foreign  power  invaded  in  Operation  Weserub ̈ung,  which enabled him to succeed Johan Nygaardsvold after King Haakon VII fled the country. In 1945, this founder of the Nasjonal Samling party was executed outside Akershus fortress for his collaboration with the Nazis. For ten points, name this treasonous president of Norway.	ANSWER: Vidkun Quisling Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 4
Funding for this site was secured for Peter Norbeck, though it was supposed to originally be placed in the Needles region to honor Red Cloud and Lewis and Clark. After abandoning a similar commission at  Stone  Mountain  venerating  Stonewall  Jackson  and  Robert  E.  Lee,  Gutzon  Borglum  designed  this monument in the Black Hills. For ten points, name this South Dakota monument featuring the faces of four presidents.	ANSWER: MountRushmore
This group placed former king Norodom Sihanouk under house arrest after a break in their alliance. This group transformed a high school into the notorious torture center S-21. After overthrowing Lon Nol to take power, this group set the calendar to “Year Zero” and sought to create an agrarian society. The “killing fields” were operated by, for ten points, what communist organization led by Pol Pot that ruled Cambodia in the 1970s?	ANSWER: KhmerRouge
This man agreed to give up his yearly consulship as part of the Second Settlement. The Praetorian Guard was established by this ruler. This man, who gave himself the title of “First Citizen,” or “princeps,” came to power after outlasting the Second Triumvirate and winning the battle of Actium, forcing his rival Marc Antony to commit suicide. For ten points, name this first emperor of Rome.	ANSWER: AugustusCaesar  (orOctavian;  accept  Gaius  Julius  CaesarAugustus;  accept  Gaius OctaviusThurinus; prompt on Caesar; do not prompt on Julius Caesar)
A golfer from this country is the only winner of the Masters to not have his jacket stored at Augusta, after he claimed to forget to bring it back; that golfer from this country became the first non-American to  win  a  career  Grand  Slam  in  1968.  One  of  the  earliest  non-European  golf  clubs  was  founded  in  this country’s city of Durban. Gary Player is a golfer from this country who controversially supported Hendrik Verwoerd [feh-vert], though he later disavowed him. For ten points, name this country where the Cape Town Open is held.	ANSWER: SouthAfrica
A cartoon satirizing this meeting shows three men on the edge of a cliff and is partly titledLEAP NO LEAP. Delegates known as “Blue Lights” attended this meeting, which was presided over by George Cabot. A debate in Pennsylvania’s senate opposed this meeting’s proposal to overturn the Three-Fifths Compromise. This meeting was portrayed as treasonous by Democratic-Republicans. For ten points, name this 1815 meeting of New England Federalists.	ANSWER: HartfordConvention Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
The leader of this organization sent a message reading “Wait for my call” and a knife emoji to his wife  shortly  before  she  reported  him  missing  to  French  authorities.  Kim  Jong  Yang  became  the  leader of  this  organization  after  Meng  Hongwei,  its  first  Chinese  president,  resigned  after  he  was  detained  on bribery allegations by Chinese authorities in October 2018. For ten points, name this international agency that coordinates crimefighting efforts between nations.	ANSWER: Interpol(orInternationalCriminalPoliceOrganization)
In 1887, this device was the agreed upon solution to the problem that the Gerry Commission tried to resolve. Dentist Albert Southwick was inspired to invent this object after an incident involving a drunken man. Often employed at Sing Sing, this device was used in 1953 on a couple found to have leaked nuclear program  secrets  to  the  Soviets.  For  ten  points,  name  this  device  used  to  execute  the  Rosenbergs,  that relies on sending a current through the victim’s body.	ANSWER:electricchair
This government renounced its claims over the Baltic States after it was forced to sign the Treaty of Rapallo. This government’s parliament was torched by Marinus van der Lubbe, leading to a crackdown on civil liberties in a series of Fire Decrees. Thanks to heavy debt from the War Guilt Clause, this government faced hyperinflation of the deutschemark. For ten points, name this German republic that was established following World War I.	ANSWER: Weimar[vye-mar] Republic
A new religious movement from this country worships “God the Parent” and teaches about achieving the  “Joyous  Life.”  Along  with  that  religion,  Tenrikyo,  another  new  religious  movement  in  this  country became recognized as a terrorist group after it released sarin gas in a subway. A controversial shrine in this country honors war criminals, and many other shrines in this country honor spirits or deities called “kami.” For ten points, name this East Asian country home to Shintoism.	ANSWER: Japan(orNippon; orNihon)
After manning a machine gun during this event, Dorie Miller became the first African-American to receive  a  Navy  Cross.  A  perpetrator  of  this  event  was  apprehended  in  the  Niihau  incident  by  civilians. This event was carried out in two waves by Vals and Zeroes, who sunk theArizona. President Roosevelt lamented  “a  date  that  will  live  in  infamy”  in  a  speech  to  Congress  after,  for  ten  points,  what  surprise attack that brought America into World War II?	ANSWER: attack onPearlHarbor Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
This  President  averted  a  strike  by  signing  the  Adamson  Act  to  grant  an  eight-hour  workday  to railroad workers. This man oversaw the deportation of over 200 anarchists on the “Soviet Ark,” many of whom were arrested in a series of raids ordered by his attorney general, Mitchell Palmer; this President’s Espionage Act, which justified those arrests, was upheld by the Supreme Court due to wartime conditions. For ten points, name this president who led the United States through World War I.	ANSWER: (Thomas) Woodrow Wilson
One  side  in  this  battle  benefited  from  the  Dowding  System,  which  used  data  from  Chain  Home stations  to  produce  maps.  Directive  No.  17  ordered  one  side  in  this  battle  to  begin  with  an  assault  on Adlertag, or Eagle Day. Failure in this battle led to the cancellation of Operation Sealion, prompting the statement of gratitude “never [...] was so much owed by so many to so few” from Winston Churchill. For ten points, name this air battle of 1940 in which the RAF defended their home from Nazi invasion.	ANSWER: Battle of Britain(accept descriptions of NaziGermanybombingany part of theUnited Kingdom, includingEngland,London, etc.; accept theBlitz)
In response to this event, the President noted “we’ve grown used to wonders in this century,” in a speech  written  by  Peggy  Noonan;  that  speech  became  known  as  the  “face  of  God”  speech.  This  event was investigated by the Rogers Commission, which included Richard Feynman [fine-man]. Schoolteacher Christa McAuliffe was killed in this event, which was caused by O-rings that failed in low temperatures. For ten points, name this 1986 tragedy in which a space shuttle exploded.	ANSWER: Space ShuttleChallengerdisaster (accept equivalents, like explosion, crash, etc.)
In some accounts, this man gathers his army to battle the emperor Lucius after angrily refusing a Roman  tribute  demand.  At  Tintagel,  this  man’s  father  disguises  himself  as  Gorlois  to  sleep  with  this man’s  mother,  Igraine.  This  son  of  Uther  Pendragon  is  the  subject  of  a  medieval  romance  by  Thomas Malory, in which he becomes a leader after pulling a sword from a stone. For ten points, name this owner of Excalibur, a legendary medieval king of England.	ANSWER: King Arthur
A plaza in this city includes Cellini’s sculpture of Perseus and a copy of a statue now held in this city’s Academy of Fine Arts. Another museum in this city holdsLa PrimaveraandThe Birth of Venusby Sandro Botticelli, who primarily worked in this city. A family of art patrons in this city included Lorenzo the  Magnificent  and  Cosimo  I,  who  commissioned  this  city’s  Uffizi  Gallery.  For  ten  points,  name  this Italian city once controlled by the Medici family.	ANSWER: Florence(orFirenze) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 4
This  man  beat  Congressman  William  Stanbery  with  a  hickory  cane  on  Pennsylvania  Avenue  after Stanbery  suggested  that  this  man  had  defrauded  Native  Americans.  To  avoid  paying  fees  from  the resulting  trial,  this  politician  fled  to  Mexico,  where  he  later  led  the  Texan  Army  at  the  Battle  of  San Jacinto and captured Santa Anna. For ten points, name this Texas politician, the namesake of the most populous city in Texas.	ANSWER: Sam Houston
A 2003 court case ruled that Job Charnock was not the founder of this city. Lord Curzon created a monument in this city’s Dalhousie Square to commemorate an incident, of which John Zephaniah Howell wrote an account of brutalities committed in Fort William by the Nawab of Bengal. 146 prisoners were locked in a cell in this city, in which only 23 survived the conditions. British prisoners were kept in the “Black Hole” of, for ten points, what capital of West Bengal in eastern India?	ANSWER:Kolkata(acceptCalcutta;  accept  additional  information  relating  to  the  Black  Hole  of CalcuttaorKolkataafter “Curzon” is mentioned)
A  building  designed  by  this  man,  Wardenclyffe,  was  the  focus  of  a  2012  preservation  effort  led  by the  webcomicThe Oatmeal.  David  Bowie  portrayed  this  real-life  person  in  the  2006  filmThe Prestige. This  man’s  development  of  a  system  licensed  by  George  Westinghouse  led  to  a  vicious  conflict  with Thomas Edison, who championed a competing system involving direct current. For ten points, name this Serbian-American scientist and inventor who names a coil that produces AC electricity.	ANSWER: Nikola Tesla
The unveiling of this structure’s design led James Webb and Ross Perot to withdraw support, with Perot controversially insulting its architect as an “eggroll.” An opponent of this structure called it a “gash of shame,” as its design emulates the shape of a closed wound. Frederick Hart’sThree Soldiersoverlooks this  memorial,  of  which  visitors  often  create  crayon  rubbings.  Maya  Lin  designed,  for  ten  points,  what memorial that lists the name of servicemen who died in a Southeast Asian War?	ANSWER: VietnamVeteransMemorial(accept descriptions of theVietnamWarmemorial; accept descriptions of theVietnamWall) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 4
A holder of this position was exhumed and tried for perjury in the Cadaver Trial. Byzantine governors of  the  Exarchate  of  Ravenna  once  appointed  people  to  this  position.  Gregory  the  Great  reformed  this position,  which  was  supposedly  given  authority  over  Western  Europe  by  the  Donation  of  Constantine. In the Great Schism, the holder of this position was excommunicated by the Orthodox Church. For ten points, name this religious position, the head of the Catholic Church.	ANSWER: Pope(orBishopofRome)
Engravings by William Hogarth are thought to be precursors to these works, especially one wherein the city of London is destroyed in 1720 by the South Sea Bubble. A creator of these works used them to popularize the elephant as a symbol for the GOP. One of these created after the Albany Congress shows a snake cut into 8 pieces and was made by Benjamin Franklin. Thomas Nast created, for ten points, what type of parody artworks often published in newspapers to comment on current events?	ANSWER: politicalcartoons (prompt on partial answers)
This U.S. state’s first constitution had a “whites only” clause. A national park in this state surrounds Mount  Mazama,  whose  caldera  filled  with  water  after  a  prehistoric  eruption.  A  wildlife  refuge  in  this state’s  Harney  Basin  was  occupied  in  2016  by  a  group  led  by  Ammon  Bundy.  The  Malheur  Wildlife Refuge and Crater Lake are within, for ten points, what Western state whose Willamette Valley was the destination for pioneers traveling a 19th century trail?	ANSWER: Oregon
This  city  gained  its  nickname  of  “City  of  Palaces”  due  to  a  comment  by  traveler  Alexander  von Humboldt. Ten days before this city hosted an Olympic games, a group of students and protesters were killed  in  its  Plaza  de  las  Tres  Culturas  in  the  Tlatelolco  Massacre.  Two  American  athletes  displayed  a Black Power salute during the 1968 Summer Olympics in, for ten points, what North American capital city?	ANSWER: MexicoCity
In a story set during this conflict, a child falls asleep while playing with a wooden sword in a forest; later, that deaf and mute boy stumbles upon the corpse of his dead parent. During this war, a character is  tricked  by  a  disguised  scout  into  attempting  to  blow  up  a  transportation  line,  then  hallucinates  his escape before being hanged for treason. For ten points, name this setting of Ambrose Bierce’s stories “An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge” and “Chickamauga.”	ANSWER: American CivilWar Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 4
Participants in this event were later caught during a gun battle at the Holbeche House. This plan was exposed in a letter addressed to Lord Monteagle, and it strove to replace the sitting monarch with Elizabeth  of  Bohemia.  Robert  Catesby  helped  coordinate  this  plan,  which  was  scheduled  for  November fifth. For ten points, name this plot that attempted to blow up James I and English Parliament, but was thwarted when Guy Fawkes was caught.	ANSWER: GunpowderPlot
A “Forum” named after this animal was founded by Phyllis Schlafly to oppose passage of the Equal Rights  Amendment.  A  depiction  of  this  animal  on  posters  was  accompanied  by  the  phrase  “we  do  our part;”  that  blue  type  of  this  animal  was  the  logo  of  the  National  Industrial  Recovery  Act.  The  lunar module of the Apollo 11 mission bore the name of this animal. For ten points, name this animal, whose bald type is the national emblem of the United States.	ANSWER:eagle(acceptEagleForum; blueeagles, descriptions of theEaglemodule, baldeagles, etc.; prompt on bird before said)
Description acceptable. The non-fictional Battle of the Windmill took place as part of an effort to achieve this action, which was taken by Hunters’ Lodges in the early 19th century. Isaac Brock’s death at Queenston Heights prevented one of these efforts. John Burgoyne repulsed an earlier attempt at this action during the Revolutionary War, during which Richard Montgomery died. For ten points, name this military action, frequently performed by the early United States, which sought to gain more territory to the north.	ANSWER: the U.S. invadingCanada(prompt on partial answers)
The name of this practice was inspired by a Richard Outcault character, a bald child who appeared inHogan’s Alley.  That  comic  strip  ran  in  both  theJournalandWorld,  respectively  owned  by  William Randolph  Hearst  and  Joseph  Pulitzer,  moguls  who  perfected  this  practice.  Public  support  for  the Spanish-American War was garnered via, for ten points, what questionable journalistic practice that uses anonymous sources, questionable facts, and sensationalist headlines to sell more newspapers?	ANSWER: yellowjournalism
In  “Human  Bondage,”  Spinoza’s  64th  proposition  notes  that  the  knowledge  of  this  concept  is inadequate knowledge and that the human mind could not conceive of this concept if the mind possessed adequate ideas. Skeptical theism is a response to a philosophical “problem” of this concept, first originated logically by Epicurus. In Zurvan theology, Angra Mainyu chose to embody this concept. For ten points, name this moral and ethical concept, often represented in Christian theology by demons and contrasted with “good.”	ANSWER: evil(accept word forms and reasonable synonyms, likebadness; accept the Problem ofEvil; accept synonyms ofdestructionafter Angra Mainyu is said; acceptsinand equivalents after Christian is said) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 4
The Alma-Ata Protocols were signed in the wake of this event, and one man’s proclamation of the “Sinatra Doctrine” encouraged this event.  One leader was imprisoned in his dacha at Foros prior to this event, which led to the formation of the CIS. The ascension of Boris Yeltsin marked the end of, for ten points, what event which led to the independence of Ukraine, Belarus, and many other countries?	ANSWER:Dissolutionof theUSSR(accept synonyms for dissolution, acceptSovietUnionfor USSR; do not accept or prompt “fall of the Berlin Wall”)
Jonathan  Baldwin  Turner  advocated  for  the  creation  of  more  of  these  institutions  in  the  1850s. The Smith-Lever Act was implemented to allow greater cooperation between these institutions and their surroundings, and HBCUs are examples of these institutions that were established for African-Americans after  the  Civil  War.   The  Morrill  Land-Grant  Acts  set  aside  land  for  the  creation  of  these  institutions, including one in Champaign, Illinois.  For ten points, name these educational institutions, including Iowa State, Cornell, and MIT.	ANSWER: colleges (oruniversities; prompt on (public) schools)
This leader is depicted in the Catalan Atlas sitting on a throne and inspecting a gold nugget.  This leader commissioned the Djinguereber[jin-gah-ray-bear] Mosque and Sankore University, both located in Timbuktu, and he caused a massive deflation of the price of gold in Cairo while on an extravagant Hajj to Mecca.  For ten points, name this Mali emperor, or Mansa, who ruled from 1312 to 1327.	ANSWER: MansaMusa(orMusaI)
This composer wrote a cantata beginning “Eternal source of light divine” to celebrate Queen Anne’s birthday.  This composer wrote four coronation anthems, includingZadok the Priest, for another British monarch  who  asked  this  composer  to  write  a  piece  celebrating  the  end  of  the  War  of  the  Austrian Succession.  For ten points, name this Baroque composer of theMusic for the Royal Fireworks, as well as the oratorioMessiah.	ANSWER: George Frideric Handel
This organization donated theSMS Goebento the Ottoman Navy, and a rebellion by this organization in Kiel led to the end of the empire it served.  Alfred Tirpitz sought to reform this organization, which used wolfpacks to attack British convoys.  This organization made heavy use of the doctrine of unrestricted submarine warfare, and was led through WWII by Admiral Karl D ̈onitz.  For ten points, name this navy which used U-Boats during the two World Wars.	ANSWER: GermanNavy(prompt on Kreigsmarine, prompt on Reichsmarine) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 4
One speech given in this location referenced a John Magee poem, noting that seven people, including Ronald McNair, had “slipped the surly bonds of Earth to touch the face of God.” After a meeting in this location, Elvis Presley was given a badge for the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs.  A photograph taken in this location shows a child playing beneath the Resolute Desk, Richard Nixon called theApollo 11astronauts from, for ten points, what room located in the West Wing in the White House?	ANSWER: OvalOffice(prompt on West Wing and White House before mentioned)
Leo Strauss argued that “Modern” philosophy began with this man, who used Hannibal and Scipio Africanus  as  examples  of  brutal  rulers.   The  author  ofAb Urbe Condita,  the  Roman  historian  Livy, inspired a discourse by this author, who encourages the title figure of another work to emulate both the lion and the fox.  “It is better to be feared than loved” according to, for ten points, what Italian author of The Prince?	ANSWER: NiccoloMachiavelli
The Sullivan-Hoey law was passed in response to this incident.  This event helped spur the growth of the ILGWU after the “Uprising of 20,000.” This event started on the eighth floor of the Asch building, whose main exits were locked on orders of the owners, Max Blanck and Isaac Harris.  146 mostly-female garment workers died in, for ten points, what 1911 fire that consumed a New York sweatshop?	ANSWER: TriangleShirtwaistFactory Fire
The United Kingdom almost joined this war after its fishermen were mistaken for warships in Dogger Bank by the Baltic Fleet.  This war’s aftermath led to Sergei Witte’s[VIT-uh’s] industrializtion efforts and the October Manifesto.  It began inconclusively at Port Arthur, and was ended, with Theodore Roosevelt’s assistance, by the Treaty of Portsmouth.  For ten points, name this 1904-05 war between countries led by Tsar Nicholas II and Emperor Meiji.	ANSWER:Russo-JapaneseWar
Strict adherence to this religion’s teachings caused the death of Elli Perkins by her schizophrenic son.   This  faith  uses  the  acronym  MEST  to  describe  the  physical  universe,  which  can  be  controlled  by Operating Thetans who have undergone “auditing” and the use of E-meters.  In this religion, the Supreme Galactic Overlord Xenu detonated hydrogen bombs in volcanoes, as described by the science fiction author ofDianetics.  For ten points, name this religion, founded by L. Ron Hubbard and practiced by people such as John Travolta and Tom Cruise.	ANSWER: Church of Scientology
The Soviet Union boycotted this event in favor of their own Spartakiad to be hosted in  Barcelona  the following  year.  The  reporters of Der Stürmer [[SHTIR-muh]]  were  banned from the host city during this procession. Prior to this event, Adidas founder Adolf Dassler convinced  Jesse  Owens  to  wear  his  shoes  prior  to  the  Long  Jump  competition.  For  ten points,  name  this  1936  athletic  event  hosted  by  the  government  of  Adolf  Hitler  in  the German capital.	ANSWER: Berlin Olympics (accept 1936 Olympics before "1936"; prompt on "Nazi Olympics")
A  representative  from  this  U.S.  state  spit  tobacco  juice  in  the  face  of  Connecticut politician  Roger  Griswold.  This  home-state  of  Matthew  Lyon  was  primarily  led  during  its time  as  an  independent  republic  by  Thomas  Chittenden. This  was  the  first  state  outside  of the  Thirteen  Colonies  to  ratify  the  U.S.  Constitution  and  was  home  to  Ethan  Allen  and  the Green  Mountain  Boys.  For  ten  points,  name  this  New  England  state  once  claimed  by  New Hampshire.	ANSWER: Vermont (accept Vermont Republic; or République du Vermont; accept State of Vermont; or État du Vermont)
A follower of the priest Iliodor [[ill-YOH-dor]] attempted to assassinate this man by stabbing him in the stomach. Another attempted assassination of this man involved feeding him  cyanide-laced  cake  before  he  was  finally  killed  with  a  bullet  to  the  head  by  Felix Yusupov.  This  holy  man  claimed  to  have  cured  Alexei  Romanov  of  hemophilia.  For  ten points,  name  this  Russian  mystic  whose  influence  grew  due  to  his  closeness  with  Empress Alexandra.	ANSWER: Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin
The Romano-British syncretized this deity with the Celtic figure Sulis, forming a duo who protected over the thermal waters of Bath. This goddess, whom the Etruscans showed uncharacteristically  hurling  lightning  bolts,  was  often  depicted  in  fresco  reliefs  with  a lowered sword as opposed to her more vicious parallel, Mars. For ten points, which Roman goddess of wisdom and war's Greek analogue is Athena?	ANSWER: Minerva (accept Menrva; do not accept "Athena")  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 4
Over  300  eunuchs  and  maids  died  in  this  city's  Old  Summer  Palace  following  its intentional  burning  by  the  British  under  Lord  Elgin.  Prince  Gong  signed  an  1860  treaty named  for  this  city,  ceding  parts  of  Manchuria  to  Russia  and  leasing  Kowloon  to Britain. Following  the  Northern  Expedition,  central  authority  was  moved  south  from  this  city  to Nanjing. The Forbidden City is located in, for ten points, what modern capital of China?	ANSWER: Beijing (or Beiping; accept Peking)
In  Islamic  tradition, this  figure  will  kill  the  malevolent ad-Dajjal [[ahd-dah-JAHL]] and both Gog and Magog during the Second Coming. The Cathedral of Turin houses a shroud supposedly  bearing  the  face  of  this  man,  whose  execution  apparatus  was  split  into  several pieces  that  are  considered  relics  in  the  Christian  church.  For  ten  points,  name  this  holy figure who was executed under Roman law in Judea, being nailed to the True Cross.	ANSWER: Jesus Christ (accept either underlined portion; accept Isa ibn Maryam; or Yeshua bar Joseph)
A congratulatory email sent to this man was allegedly one of only two emails sent by Bill Clinton during his presidency. Though not John McCain, this man’s acceptance of a $200,000  loan  made  him  a  member  of  the  Keating  Five.  A  record  three-and-a-half  hour flight from L.A. to New York was conducted by this man before being chosen as a member of the Mercury Seven. The lone occupant on a five-hour flight in 1962 aboard Friendship 7, for ten points, who was this astronaut, the first American to orbit the Earth?	ANSWER: John Glenn (or John Herschel Glenn Jr.)
In his treatise, Thoughts on Government, this man wrote that “Politics is the Science of human happiness.” As a member of the Second Continental Congress, this man predicted that  American  independence  would  be  celebrated  on  July  2nd.  As  a  lawyer,  this  man successfully  defended  Thomas  Preston  and  the  other  British  soldiers  who  perpetrated  the Boston Massacre. For ten points, name this Massachusetts statesman who also served as the first vice president and second president of the United States.	ANSWER: John Adams (do not accept "John Quincy Adams")
This  city  behind  the  Warwick  Line  was  defended  in  a  siege  by  Confederate  John  B. McGruder  during  the  Peninsular  Campaign  of  the  U.S.  Civil  War.  This  city  is  one  of  three sites on Virginia’s Historic Triangle, along with Williamsburg and Jamestown. Redoubt 10 at this  site  was  assaulted  by  Alexander  Hamilton,  and  it  fell  after  a  blockade  by  the  forces  of the Comte de Grasse. For ten points, name this town that was the site of Cornwallis’s 1781 surrender during the American Revolutionary War.	ANSWER: Yorktown, Virginia (accept Battle of Yorktown; or Siege of Yorktown)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 4
Though Milton Obote [[oh-BOH-teh]] was restored to this country's presidency after a brief war with Tanzania, he did not restore its traditional kingdoms such as Ankole [[ahn- KOH-leh]].  Obote's  predecessor  proclaimed  himself  Conqueror  of  the  British  Empire  and expelled  this  country's  Asian  population  while  declaring  himself  King  of  Scotland.  During that  dictator's  rule,  Israel  rescued  over  100  hostages  from  this  country  in  Operation Entebbe [[en-TEH-beh]]. For ten points, name this country, once ruled by Idi Amin.	ANSWER: Republic of Uganda   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 4
The  losing  running  mate  in  this  election  year  ran  for  President  again  four  years  later  despite  the National  Enquirerexposing  his  affair  with  Rielle  Hunter.  This  election  year’s  “October  surprise”  may have been a videotape of Osama bin Laden taunting one candidate as “easy for us to provoke.” The Swift Boat Veterans for Truth released attack ads in, for ten points, what election year in which John Kerry lost to the re-election campaign of George W. Bush?	ANSWER: U.S. Presidential election of 2004
This event, which may have been started by an attack by Janibeg, re-occurred in the 1850s in China and India, and again in San Francisco in 1900. The Italian city of Pistoia went into isolation during this event,  which  was  marked  by  the  emergence  of  doctors  wearing  bird  beaks  stuffed  with  sweet  smelling flowers.  At  the  time,  this  event  was  commonly  blamed  on  Jews  poisoning  wells,  but  its  true  cause  was infected fleas. For ten points, name this plague that killed a third of Europe in the 14th century.	ANSWER: BlackDeath(acceptBubonicPlague; accept theBlackPlague; prompt on plague)
Gabriel tries to play this instrument, but it makes no sound, at the end ofFencesby August Wilson. In 1845, Christophe Ballot assembled two groups of players of this instrument for what may have been the first public demonstration of the Doppler Effect. The “natural” style of this instrument was popular in the Baroque era, and this instrument didn’t receive its now-common valves until the 20th century. Marching parades and fanfares typically feature, for ten points, what highest standard brass instrument?	ANSWER: trumpet
This  man  yelled  “Come  on,  you  Wolverines”  to  rally  the  Michigan  Cavalry  Brigade,  which  he commanded at Hanover and at Gettysburg during the Civil War. Prior to one battle, Alfred Terry ordered this commander of the 7th Cavalry Regiment to scout along the Rosebud Creek. Forces led by Chief Gall and Crazy Horse killed this commander and his companies at an 1876 battle during the Great Sioux War. For ten points, name this officer who made his “last stand” at the Battle of Little Bighorn.	ANSWER: George Armstrong Custer
During this event, the Twa people were targeted for allegedly aiding the enemy. The Arusha Accords failed to address the tensions leading up to this event, which was mitigated through Operation Turquoise’s creation  of  a  safe  zone.  The  order  to  “cut  down  the  tall  trees”  was  given  during  this  event,  which  was perpetrated by the Interahamwe. A Patriotic Front led by Paul Kagame took Kigali to end, for ten points, what 1994 event in which the Hutus slaughtered the Tutsis?	ANSWER: Rwandangenocide(accept descriptive answers of agenocideof theTutsis/by theHutus before either is mentioned) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
The Council of Pisa failed to end this period by electing Alexander V. This period was ended by a council that also ordered the execution of Jan Hus, and it began with the election of Clement VII in 1378. The election of Martin V at the Council of Constance brought an end to this period, which included the rule of Benedict XIII as Antipope. For ten points, name this period from 1378 to 1417 in which multiple popes reigned simultaneously from Rome and Avignon.	ANSWER: WesternSchism(acceptSchismof1378before  “1378”  is  mentioned;  acceptGreat OccidentalSchism, but do not prompt on “Great Schism” alone; acceptPapalSchism)
This man, who fled to Crown Point after a battle in which his ships were destroyed by Guy Carleton, spread  rumors  that  his  force  approaching  Fort  Stanwix  was  much  larger  than  it  really  was.  After  the Battle of Lake Champlain, this husband of Peggy Shippen prompted Benjamin Franklin to scowl “Judas sold  only  one  man,”  but  this  man  “[sold]  three  million.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  Revolutionary  War general who tried to betray West Point to the British.	ANSWER: Benedict Arnold
An  1897  book  titled  for  this  action  claims  that  it  is  more  common  during  peace  than  war  and examines historical rates of this action for Protestants and Catholics. This action is divided into egoistic, altruistic, anomic, and fatalistic types in one of the first ever sociological case studies. Emile Durkheim studied, for ten points, what action that may be taken as a result of severe depression, the act of ending one’s own life?	ANSWER: suicide(accept obvious equivalents such askillingyourselfbefore “ending your own life”)
A  Caproni  heavy  bomber  was  daringly  piloted  under  this  structure  in  a  1919  stunt  conducted  by Giorgio  Pessi.  The  architect  of  this  structure  was  assisted  by  his  wife  Emily,  who  was  thus  named  the “first woman field engineer.” P.T. Barnum promoted his circus and this structure by having Jumbo the elephant walk across it in 1884. A father and son of the Roebling family designed this structure over the East River. For ten points, name this bridge that links a namesake Long Island borough to Manhattan.	ANSWER: BrooklynBridge
This state promoted a traditional view of motherhood, one of many conservative reforms promoted as National Regeneration. A paramilitary group in this state called theMilicewas headed by its Prime Minister, Pierre Laval. This state’s ships were attacked by the British while stationed at Mers el K ́ebir and were scuttled in Toulon. This state revolved around the popularity of its president, Marshal Philippe Pet ́ain. For ten points, name this puppet state that was established by the Nazis after the fall of France.	ANSWER: VichyFrance (acceptFrenchState) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
This  man  allegedly  ordered  each  of  his  soldiers  to  kill  24  civilians,  resulting  in  a  bloody  massacre outside  Urgench.  Territories  conquered  by  this  man  were  governed  by  the  Yassa  code  and  included  the Khwarazmian Empire. This man launched a campaign against the Western Xia and Jin dynasties, though his conquest of China was completed by his grandson. For ten points, name this founder of the Mongolian Empire and grandfather of Kublai Khan.	ANSWER: GenghisKhan (acceptTemujin)
Frank DiPascali worked for 33 years under this man, who Genevievette Walker-Lightfoot attempted to investigate. Jeffry Picower was the largest beneficiary from this man’s core business, which led Picower to hand over $7.2 billion gained from it. This man was arrested after he told his son Mark that his business was “one big lie,” and he was sentenced to 150 years in prison in 2009. The New York Mets were among the victims of, for ten points, what fraudster who operated the largest Ponzi scheme in U.S. history?	ANSWER: Bernard Lawrence “Bernie” Madoff
Because he could not swim, this man was forced to awkwardly paddle around in water wings when Mao  Zedong  insisted  on  meeting  in  a  swimming  pool.  This  leader  made  a  controversial  declaration  at the Polish Embassy in Moscow, and he protested Lorenzo Sumulong’s address to the UN by banging his shoe on a desk. This man, who denounced the cult of personality of his predecessor in the 1956 “Secret Speech,” presided over the Cuban Missile Crisis. For ten points, name this Soviet premier who succeeded Joseph Stalin in 1953.	ANSWER: Nikita Khrushchev
The protagonist of this work finds solace in the fact that “his wife and little ones are still beyond the invader’s  farthest  advance.”  At  the  end  of  this  work,  a  figure  swings  “gently  from  side  to  side  beneath the timbers” of the central location in northern Alabama. The protagonist struggles to free himself of a noose as he falls into the water in, for ten points, what short story about Confederate supporter Peyton Farquhar, written by Ambrose Bierce?	ANSWER: An OccurrenceatOwlCreekBridge
Security  guard  William  Barry  and  busboy  Karl  Uecker  failed  to  prevent  this  event.  A  Boris  Yaro photograph of this event depicts a crouched Juan Romero, who had been shaking hands with the target at the time. This event, which occurred prior to a press conference regarding the defeat of Eugene McCarthy in the California primary, took place at the Ambassador Hotel. For ten points, name this 1968 event in which Sirhan Sirhan shot a presidential candidate.	ANSWER: assassination(ormurder,shooting,  etc.)  ofRobert  F.Kennedy(orassassinationof RFK; prompt on partial answers) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
Cyclists traversing this island usually take about two weeks to go the over 800 miles from Land’s End to John o’ Groats, taking motorways like the M5, which opened in 1962. In a 1967 paper that predated his coining of the term “fractal,” Benoit Mandelbrot discussed the length of this island’s coast. The Antonine Wall and Hadrian’s Wall were built on, for ten points, what largest European island that is home to the countries of Scotland, Wales, and England?	ANSWER: Great Britain(do not accept England, UK, etc.)
In  opposition  to  this  policy,  Robert  Taft  declared  that  “you  certainly  don’t  want  the  same  gum back.” This policy inspired the Canadian “Billion Dollar Gift” and grew out of the “destroyers for bases” agreement. This policy, which was compared to giving a neighbor a garden hose to put out a fire, marked the end of the Neutrality Acts. For ten points, name this 1941 program that allowed for the United States to supply the Allies with food and weapons.	ANSWER:Lend-LeaseAct
In 1511, a force from this country led by Alfonso de Albuquerque captured the city of Malacca. Prior to 1975, this country controlled East Timor, and prior to 1961, it controlled the city of Goa. An explorer from  this  country  was  the  first  European  to  reach  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  South  Africa.  Explorers Vasco da Gama and Bartolomeu Dias were from, for ten points, what country where Prince Henry the Navigator sponsored explorations as a rival to its neighbor, Spain?	ANSWER: Portugal
This university’s Ryerson Physical Laboratory was the site where Robert Millikan conducted his oil drop experiment in 1909. Sergio de Castro became a Minister of Finance after studying at this school as part of the Chile Project. A series of 1962 sit-ins at this university were organized by then-student Bernie Sanders. For ten points, name this university where Milton Friedman was a member of a prominent school of economics in Illinois.	ANSWER: University of Chicago
This man ordered grapeshot to be fired on his own soldiers to win the tightly contested Battle of Guilford  Courthouse.  Though  he  often  feuded  with  his  superior  Henry  Clinton,  this  man  was  able  to embarrass Horatio Gates at Camden. After one battle, this man claimed he was sick and sent his second in command, Charles O’Hara, to surrender instead. For ten points, name this British commander who was defeated by Comte de Rochambeau and George Washington at Yorktown.	ANSWER: CharlesCornwallis Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
The remnants of this government established the Republic of Ezo after losing the Boshin War. Two and  a  half  centuries  earlier,  this  government  was  founded  after  its  leader  won  the  Battle  of  Sekigahara against  the  Toyotomi  clan.  This  government’s  policy  of  sakoku  came  to  an  end  when  Matthew  Perry’s Black Ships forced the opening of Japan through the 1854 Convention of Kanagawa. For ten points, name this last Japanese shogunate.	ANSWER: TokugawaShogunate (orTokugawaBakufu)
Xenophon’sAnabasisdescribes  ten  thousand  Greek  soldiers  of  this  type  who  fought  Artaxerxes  II of Persia. A war named for these people was won by Hamilcar Barca and led to his conquest of Spain. Famed soldiers of this type include slingers from Rhodes and archers from Crete. Greeks who fought for Persia were, for ten points, what type of soldier that fought not for national pride, but for money?	ANSWER: mercenary(prompt on descriptive answers)
The  most  prominent  of  the  Townshend  Acts  not  to  be  repealed  in  1770  was  a  tax  levied  on  this commodity.  TheDartmouth,  theEleanor,  and  theBeavercarried  this  commodity  from  England  to  the American colonies. The Intolerable Acts were passed in response to the dumping of this commodity into a Massachusetts Harbor in 1773 by members of the Sons of Liberty. For ten points, identify this commodity destroyed in a namesake Boston party.	ANSWER: tea(acceptTeaAct; accept BostonTeaParty)
This location is the setting of a photo of a boy holding a toy hand grenade by Diane Arbus. Over 7,500 vinyl frames were adorned with saffron nylon fabric during a Christo and Jeanne-Claude exhibit at this location known asThe Gates. Belvedere Castle and the Strawberry Fields memorial to John Lennon are located in this park, which was outlined in the Greensward Plan by Calvert Vaux [voh] and Frederick Law Olmsted. For ten points, name this large park in Manhattan.	ANSWER: CentralPark(prompt on Manhattan and/or New York before “this park” is read)
Joseph Bazalgette designed this city’s sewer system, which reduced the frequency of cholera outbreaks and  prevented  a  recurrence of  the  1858 “Great  Stink.”  This  city was  one  of  first  sites for  rubber  to  be grown outside of South America, as part of a botanical research project at Kew. This city’s Crystal Palace stood in its Hyde Park until 1936 and was opened in 1851 by Queen Victoria. Sewage was once pumped into the River Thames in, for ten points, what capital city of England?	ANSWER: London Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
On this island, a 5th century BC law code inscribed on circular walls can be seen in ruins in Gortyn. This island is home to a distinctive type of pottery known as the “kamares ware,” examples of which are on display in Heraklion. The Thera volcanic eruption may have ended a civilization on this island, where frescos  depicting  a  bull-leaping  motif  are  common  at  the  palace  of  Knossos.  For  ten  points,  name  this largest Greek island, the center of the Minoan civilization.	ANSWER: Crete
A former Speaker of this state’s House of Representatives ran for the Senate in 2010, beating Kendrick Meek and Charlie Crist. A Congresswoman from this state resigned as DNC chair after a scandal involving Wikileaks and her hacked emails. Rick Scott governs, for ten points, what swing state that was represented by Debbie Wasserman Schultz in the House and is currently represented in the Senate by Marco Rubio?	ANSWER:Florida
Anna Chennault arranged a meeting for this man with Ambassador Bui Diem that violated the Logan Act. Charles Colson admitted this man had told him that a typewriter was fabricated in the Alger Hiss case. This politician sabotaged peace talks in Vietnam in the aforementioned Chennault affair, promising better results after this man defeated Hubert Humphrey in the 1968 election. For ten points, name this US President who withdrew the US from Vietnam in 1973.	ANSWER: Richard Nixon
In 2015, a yearly pillow fight at this location was banned after hard objects were stuffed in pillow cases, leading to two dozen injuries. This location was connected to Constitution Island by a long chain in  its  original  design  by  Tadeusz  Kosciuszko [tah-dah-ooshko-SHOO-skoh].  The  longest  continuously occupied American military post is, for ten points, what New York location, the base of the U.S. Military Academy, which was to be betrayed by Benedict Arnold?	ANSWER: WestPoint(accept theUSMilitaryAcademyuntil mentioned; prompt on “The Point;” prompt on “Army”)
The Domus Conversorum was a residence specifically built to house these people, many of whom died when Clifford’s Tower, the keep of York Castle, was burned to the ground in 1190. Oliver Cromwell ended  a  policy  whereby  these  people  had  been  banned  from  England  since  the  reign  of  Edward  I.  The Balfour Declaration pledged support for the creation of a homeland for these people in the Middle East. For ten points, name this religious group whose British members have included Benjamin Disraeli.	ANSWER: Jewish people Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
This monarch died at Newark Castle during a conflict with Robert Fitzwalter called the First Barons’ War. This king feuded with Pope Innocent III over his appointment of Stephen Langton to the post of Archbishop of Canterbury. This ruler, who was nicknamed “Lackland,” negotiated a legal document with a  group  of  rebellious  noblemen  at  a  meadow  at  Runnymede.  For  ten  points,  name  this  ruler,  the  only English king of his name, who signed the Magna Carta in 1215.	ANSWER: John(orJohnLackland; acceptJohnI)
This man was killed by Tomyris, a female leader of the Massagetae, after he treacherously attacked her.  This  ruler  conquered  Media  and  Lydia  and,  after  destroying  the  Neo-Babylonian  Empire,  he  gave himself  the  title  of  King  of  Kings,  orshahanshah.  Alexander  the  Great  visited  this  man’s  tomb  in  his capital, Persepolis. For ten points, name this “Great” founder of the Persian Empire.	ANSWER: Cyrusthe Great (orCyrusII)
This company gained a foothold in China by distributing lamps under the name Mei Foo. A Puck cartoon  depicts  this  company  as  a  snake  fighting  an  infant.McClure’smagazine  exposed  the  practices of  this  company  via  muckraking  journalist  Ida  Tarbell.  Chevron  was  formed  from  the  breakup  of  the monopoly of this company in 1911. For ten points, name this American-based petroleum company founded by John D. Rockefeller.	ANSWER: StandardOilCompany
The school of “subaltern studies” generally studies people originally from this continent. A refugee family that immigrated from this continent is the focus ofThe  Spirit  Catches  You  and  You  Fall  Down. The principle of relative pluralism in a religion that originated on this continent is typically illustrated by the parable of the blind men and an elephant. Gayathri Spivak, the Hmong, and Jainism all originated from, for ten points, what largest continent on Earth?	ANSWER: Asia
An  attack  on  this  country’s  broadcasting  company,  the  RTS,  took  place  during  the  Bulldozer Revolution in 2000. One of its leaders ordered the assassination of Ivan Stambolic and was targeted by a 1999 NATO bombing. Kosovo’s independence from this state has not yet formally been recognized by much of the world. Slobodan Milosevic once ruled, for ten points, what former Yugoslavian republic that lost its access to the sea after the 2006 secession of Montenegro but maintains its capital at Belgrade?	ANSWER: Republic of Serbia Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
John Ingram served as the final leader of this movement. One side in this event coaxed the Occaneechi into  attacking  the  Susquehannock  and  vandalized  the  Green  Spring  estate.  This  rebellion,  which  ended when its leader died of dysentery, was prompted by governor William Berkeley’s failure to address fears of Indian attack. Jamestown was burnt during, for ten points, what 1676 rebellion of disgruntled Virginian settlers?	ANSWER: Nathaniel Bacon’s Rebellion
The  North  and  South  basins  of  this  body  of  water  are  separated  by  what  used  to  be  the  Lisan Peninsula. The Mesha Stele, or Moabite Stone, was discovered along its banks. A pillar overlooking this body of water is known as “Lot’s wife.” The Qumran caves along its shore were home to a sect of Essenes whose writings were rediscovered beginning in 1946. A set of “scrolls” were discovered near, for ten points, what salty body of water bordered by Jordan, the West Bank, and Israel?	ANSWER:DeadSea
An opera by this man is based on a real-life incident recorded in theDivine Comedyin which the title man impersonated Buoso Donati. The aria “O mio babbino caro” is from this composer’sGianni Schicchi [skee-kee]. In another of his operas, a character is often introduced with the “Star-Spangled Banner” and marries a woman who sings “Un bel di” and commits seppuku. For ten points, name this Italian composer who depicted Lieutenant Pinkerton and Cio-Cio San [cho-chosahn] in hisMadame Butterfly?	ANSWER: Giacomo Puccini
This country’s ruling party has been accused of holding slush funds through Senator Luis Barcenas’ Swiss bank accounts. The leadership of this country’s Socialist Worker’s Party is vacant after a dispute with Susana Diaz led Pedro Sanchez to resign. In October 2016, this country’s Prime Minister, Mariano Rajoy of the People’s Party, was sworn in for a second term after a 10-month period of political deadlock. For ten points, name this Iberian country whose capital is Madrid.	ANSWER: Spain
This case was cited a decade later inGriffin v. Prince Edward County, which forbade a plank of the “Stanley plan” calling for a voucher system. Those vouchers were part of Harry Byrd’s plan of “massive resistance” against this Supreme Court ruling, which was decided unanimously. Thurgood Marshall argued for the NAACP in this case, which overturnedPlessy  v.  Ferguson. For ten points, name this 1954 case that declared “separate but equal” segregation of public schools unconstitutional.	ANSWER:Brownv. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
Morgan  Lewis  defeated  this  man  to  become  Governor  of  New  York  in  1804.    James  Wilkinson conspired with this man to create a monarchy in the American west with support from Spain.  This man, Thomas Jefferson’s first Vice President, went to Weehauken, New Jersey to settle a personal dispute with a former Secretary of the Treasury.  For ten points, name this man who killed Alexander Hamilton in an 1804 duel.	ANSWER: Aaron Burr
This organization absorbed Maktab al-Khidamat after the death of Abdullah Azzam in a car bombing. A pair of attacks in Dar es Salaam and Nairobi on August 7, 1998, was orchestrated by this organization; those attacks on U.S. embassies prompted its leader to be placed on the FBI’s Most Wanted list.  Khalid Sheikh  Mohammed  and  Zacarias  Moussaoui  were  members  of  this  group  until  their  arrest  for  planning and knowledge of another of this group’s attacks.  For ten points, name this Islamic terrorist group that perpetrated the September 11th attacks under Osama bin Laden.	ANSWER: al-Qaeda
Former President of Sears Julius Rosenwald was asked by this man to serve on the board of directors for an institute he headed.  This man advised his people to “Cast down your bucket where you are” in his “Atlanta Compromise” speech,  which was opposed by the formulator of the “Talented Tenth” doctrine, W.E.B. DuBois.  For ten points, name this African-American leader of the Tuskegee Institute.	ANSWER: Booker T.Washington
This man, who introduced the litmus test for differentiating acids and bases, used Robert Hooke’s air pump to refute contemporary claims that vacuums don’t exist.  He coined the modern usage of the term “element” in 1661’sThe Sceptical Chemist.  For ten points, name this English scientist whose namesake gas law describes how, at constant temperature, the pressure and volume of a gas are inversely related.	ANSWER: RobertBoyle
Thomas Newcomen patented the first successful one of these devices, which was used to pump water out of mines.  Hero of Alexandria’s aeliopile was a progenitor to this device, and John Smeaton created a competitor one of these products in England in the 1750s.  Matthew Boulton worked to manufacture these devices with a man who installed a separate condenser to improve the efficiency of these devices. For ten points, name this invention, refined by James Watt, which provided power for the First Industrial Revolution in England.	ANSWER: steamengine(prompt on partial) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 5
This  man  was  arrested  by  Zhang  Xueliang  in  the  Xi’an  Incident  a  year  after  his  forces  failed  to capture an evading enemy on the Long March.  This successor of Sun Yatsen was forced to settle at an island  nation  after  losing  a  war  against  the  Communist  Party.   For  ten  points,  name  this  leader  of  the Kuomintang who escaped to Taiwan after losing the Chinese Civil War to Mao Zedong.	ANSWER:ChiangKai-Shek orJiangJieshi
This player was selected one pick before David Greenwood after his team won a coin flip against the Chicago Bulls for the number one pick in the 1979 draft.  In his final year at Michigan State, he defeated Larry  Bird’s  Indiana  State  in  the  NCAA  championship  game.   This  co-owner  of  the  Dodgers  started  a foundation  in  1991  to  raise  awareness  of  AIDS  after  he  announced  that  he  was  HIV  positive.   For  ten points, name this Hall of Fame point guard for the Los Angeles Lakers.	ANSWER: Earvin “Magic” Johnson
In Florence, this commodity was produced by the Arte de Lana, and the Ciompi[CHOMP-ee] was an  uprising  of  workers  with  this  commodity.   Production  of  this  commodity  was  the  cornerstone  of  the medieval English economy, where it drove the adoption of enclosure and was exported to the Flemish cloth trade.   Eventually  replaced  in  some  part  by  Venetian-imported  silk,  for  ten  points,  name  this  material, which one can obtain by shearing a sheep.	ANSWER: wool
The goals of this agreement had been brought up earlier by John Slidell, and this treaty put an end to the war that began with the Thornton Affair.  A failed clause in this treaty that would have outlawed slavery in the territories it acquired was known as the Wilmot Proviso, and the United States paid $15 million in this agreement to gain the lands north of the Rio Grande.  For ten points, name this 1848 treaty that ended the Mexican-American War.	ANSWER: Treaty of GuadalupeHidalgo
This city’s police operates a “black site” at Homan Square, where lawyers are not allowed to speak with clients.  In October 2014, Jason Van Dyke, a member of this city’s police, shot Laquan McDonald 16 times; in November 2015, Van Dyke was charged with murder in Cook County.  For ten points, name this Midwestern city where video of the McDonald shooting was released against the wishes of its mayor Rahm Emanuel.	ANSWER: Chicago
This   "people   of   the   flint"   were   the   target   of   missionary   efforts   by   Johannes Megapolensis  [[yoh-HAH-ness  meh-guh-poh-LEN-siss]]  and  earlier  battled  Hurons  under the command of Samuel de Champlain. Due to claiming lands along a namesake river valley west of the Hudson River, this group was known as the Keepers of the Eastern Door. For ten points,  name  this  member  tribe  of  the  Iroquois  [[IH-roh-kwoy]]  Confederacy,  known  in popular  culture  for  an  incorrectly  attributed  hairstyle  in which  the  sides  of  the  head  are shaven.	ANSWER: Mohawks (or Kanienʼkehá꞉ka; accept Keepers of the Eastern Door before mentioned; prompt on "Iroquois" before mentioned)
As  punishment  for  smoking,  Deccan  [[DEH-kan]]  sultan  Malik  Ambar  poured  this substance  into  the  ears  and  mouths  of  criminals.  The  Piazza  Fontana  bombings  occurred during  a  tumultuous  time  in  Italian  history  known  as  the  "Years  of  [this  substance]."  This substance's presence in Roman toys and plumbing has been speculated as a cause of the fall of  the  Roman  Empire  due  to  widespread  impotence  and  ill  health  effects.  For  ten  points, name this toxic metal symbolized Pb.	ANSWER: Lead (accept Pb before mentioned; accept Years of Lead; accept Anni di piombo)
During a performance in this country of the ballet Spartacus by Aram Khachaturian [[kah-chah-TOO-ree-ahn]],  Leonid  Yakobson  [[YAH-kohb-sun]]  abandoned  the  traditional pointe technique  during  a  performance  at  the  Bolshoi  Theatre.  Ethnically  Polish  dancer Vaslav  Nijinsky  [[nih-JIN-skee]]  helped  popularize  a  ballet  company  named  for  this  nation originally founded by Sergei Diaghilev [[dee-AH-geh-lef]]. Unrest occurred during the ballet The Rite of Spring, composed by, for ten points, what nation's composer, Igor Stravinsky?	ANSWER: Russia (accept Russian Empire; accept Soviet Union; accept USSR; or Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; accept CCCP; prompt on "Armenia"; prompt on "Georgia"; NOTE: Khachaturian was born to an Armenian family in modern-day Georgia, but he was a Russian, then Soviet citizen)
Pinaka  and  Shiranga  are  this  type  of  weapon  in  Hindu  myth,  in  which  Arjuna  [[ar- JOO-nah]]  also  fights  with  one  of  these  weapons  made  by  Brahma  called  Gandiva  [[gahn- DEE-vah]].  Hou  Yi  [[HOH-YEE]]  uses  one  of  these  weapons  in  Chinese  myth  to  eliminate nine of the ten suns. The constellation Sagittarius is named after Chiron's [[KY-rons]] role in teaching the use of these weapons to Achilles. Medieval tales abound with legends of users of  these  weapons  from  Sherwood  Forest.  For  ten  points,  name  this  ranged  weapon  often featured in mythology.	ANSWER: Bow and Arrows  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 5
Thomas  Young  helped  decipher  this  writing  system  by  identifying  that  cartouches [[kar-TOO-shes]]   were   used   to   enclose   royal   names.   Demotic   [[dee-MAH-tik]]   was   a simplified  version  of Hieratic  [[hy-RAH-tik]]  cursive,  which  derived  from  this  writing system.  Jean-François  Champollion  [[shahm-pohl-YOHN]]  deciphered  this  script  using  an object  which  depicted  a  decree  in  this  system  as  well  as  Ancient  Greek.  The  Rosetta  Stone helped decipher, for ten points, what pictographic writing system of Ancient Egypt?	ANSWER: Egyptian Hieroglyphs (or Hieroglyphics)
In  an  effort  to  map  this  river  in  the  19th  century,  Breton  explorer  Auguste  Pavie [[pah-VEE]] led a namesake mission with a convoy of elephants. During the first days of the Tet  Offensive,  the  Vietcong  attempted  to seize  all major  towns in  South Vietnam  along  this river. Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam formed a commission to maintain the natural integrity of, for ten points, what river of Southeast Asia?	ANSWER: Mekong River (accept Mekong River Commission)
Near the end of this decade, Link Wray released the song “Rumble,” and Alan Freed’s career tanked due to the Payola scandal. Number one hits in this decade included “The Ballad of Davy Crockett,” “Love Me Tender,” and “La Bamba.” At this decade’s end, a plane crash called “The Day the Music Died” resulted in the deaths of Richie Valens, The Big Bopper,  and  Buddy  Holly.  For  ten  points,  name  this  decade  in  which  the  rock-and-roll hit "Heartbreak Hotel" became a number one hit for Elvis Presley.	ANSWER: 1950s
A victim of one of these attacks attempted to fold one thousand origami cranes to rid herself  of  a  perpetual  illness  caused  by  one  of  these  events,  the  orders  for  which  were transmitted by General Thomas T. Handy. The Flying Fortress Enola Gay dropped a payload known as the "Little Boy" during the first of these events. For ten points, name these attacks by the United States on Japan, the only recorded nuclear bombings in history.	ANSWER: Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (accept Atomic Bombings of Japan; accept "Nuclear" in place of "Atomic"; prompt on "Bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" or either individual city)
To  criticize  a  man  holding  this  position,  Buzz  Windrip,  Doremus  Jessup  uses  the periodical The Vermont Vigilance in  the  Sinclair  Lewis  novel, It Can't Happen Here.  Prior  to the events of Philip K. Dick's The Man in the High Castle, the successor of John Nance Garner, John W. Bricker, held this political position but failed to prevent an Axis occupation of North America. Phyllis Wheatley wrote "To his Excellency General Washington" about a holder of, for ten points, what executive position?	ANSWER: President of the United States of America (accept American President; accept U.S. in place of United States)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 5
A passive walkout-turned-uprising in one of these places in Vorkuta [[vor-KOO-tah]] occurred  in  response  to  a  mass influx of Ukrainians  and  the  arrest  of  the  repressive NKVD head   Lavrentiy   Beria   [[law-REN-tee   BEH-ree-ah]].   The   Khrushchev   Thaw   led   to   the rehabilitation  of  many  prisoners  held  in  these  camps  first  created  by  Lenin  during  the Russian  Civil War. Many of  the  political opponents  of  the  Great  Purge  were sent  to,  for  ten points, what Soviet forced labor camps prominent in the Stalinist period?	ANSWER: Gulags (accept Glávnoje upravlénije lageréj)   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 5
Fundraising  for  this  monument  included  the  creation  of  5  million  half-dollar  coins  that  depicted two  chatting  soldiers  on  horseback.  North  Carolina  governor  Angus  McLean  offered  protection  from extradition to Gutzon Borglum, who fled arrest in 1925 after being fired from the design of this monument and  destroying  his  models.  This  monument,  the  world’s  largest  bas  relief,  is  the  centerpiece  of  a  park that  opened  on  the  100th  anniversary  of  Abraham  Lincoln’s  assassination.  For  ten  points,  name  this controversial Georgia monument that honors three Confederate leaders.	ANSWER: StoneMountain
A politician from this state was labeled “eccentric and unpredictable” by Isaiah Berlin because he founded  his  state’s  Progressive  Party  and  yet  was  a  staunch  isolationist.  Another  politician  from  this state created a short-lived Progressive Party to support his bid for the 1924 Presidential election. While campaigning  on  the  Bull  Moose  ticket,  itself  a  Progressive  Party,  Theodore  Roosevelt  was  shot  in  this state by John Schrank. For ten points, name this state where the progressive La Follette family governed from Madison.	ANSWER: Wisconsin
This country’s national dish consists of a mix of chili peppers and cheese called Ema datshi. In the Battle  of  the  Five  Lamas,  invaders  were  blown  up  while  trying  to  loot  this  country’s  Simtokha  Dzong. This country, which banned climbing its mountain Gangkhar Puensum, was led until 2006 by King Jigme Singye Wangchuck, who coined the term Gross National Happiness. Druk the Thunder Dragon is featured on the flag of, for ten points, what Himalayan nation ruled from Thimphu?	ANSWER: Kingdom of Bhutan(orDrukYul)
Joseph Rosa is considered the chief biographer of this man, who allegedly killed a bear with a knife to allow a freight train to continue its journey to Santa Fe. This man killed the leader of the McCanles Gang during a fight at a Pony Express Station. Hays and Abilene were the Kansas cities where this man served as marshal. Jack McCall murdered this man at a saloon in Deadwood while he held two black eights and two black aces during a game of poker. For ten points, name this Wild West folk hero known for carrying the “dead man’s hand.”	ANSWER: James Butler “Wild Bill” Hickok
Poet Christine de Pisan used this art form to show Reason, Justice, and Rectitude as crown-wearing women  building a  wall  inThe  Book  of  the  City  of  Women.  The earliest  depiction of  Thomas Beckett’s murder  is  one  of  these  works,  which  are  characterized  by  marginalia  and  vibrant  initials  interspersed throughout the text. For ten points, name these medieval books filled with gold and silver embellishments and illustrations.	ANSWER: illuminatedmanuscript  (accept  word  forms  likeillumination;  prompt  on  “painting,” “drawing,” “book,” or “manuscript”) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
This organization faced a rebellion of miners led by the nobleman Engelbrekt, who called the first Riksdag  of  all  four  estates  to  rally  opposition.  The  members  of  this  organization  were  unified  in  their opposition to Albrecht of Mecklenburg, though they later allowed his son Erik of Pomerania to rule over this group. This union was formed in order to counteract the Hanseatic League by Margaret I. For ten points, name this union of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway that lasted from 1397 to 1523.	ANSWER: KalmarUnion
Ali Kolon and Suleiman Nar were taken hostage by this ruler, who had them educated. This ruler succeeded  Abu  Bakr  II,  who  disappeared  while  leading  a  massive  expedition  to  explore  the  Atlantic. This ruler ordered the construction of the University of Sankore as part of a series of improvements that included the building of mosques in Timbuktu. For ten points, name this leader of the Mali Empire who devalued the price of gold in Egypt during his 1324 pilgrimage to Mecca.	ANSWER: MansaMusaI
As Governor of New York, this man signed an act to gradually abolish slavery that, despite stating children of slaves were free, forced them into decades of indentured servitude. In 1795, this man negotiated the  removal  of  British  troops  from  the  Northwest  Territory  with  a  treaty  fixing  many  of  the  issues  of the earlier Treaty of Paris. With Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, this man wrote the Federalist Papers. For ten points, name this first Chief Justice of the United States.	ANSWER: John Jay
This country carried out Operation Cerberus to successfully extract its ships from the port of Brest. TheGloriouswas  sunk  by  a  27,000  yard  shot  from  one  of  this  country’sScharnhorst-class  battleships. At  the  Battle  of  the  Denmark  Strait,  thePrince  of  WalesandHoodwere  defeated  by  this  country’s Prinz EugenandBismarck. For ten points, name this country whose navy attacked Allied shipping using wolf-packs of U-boat ships.	ANSWER: Nazi Germany
A meteorological agency monitors 59 secret locations for the initial presence of these items. Specimens of  the  Yoshino  variety  of  these  organisms  have  been  proven  to  be  genetically  identical  to  each  other, making disease a risk. Maps track a namesake “front” of these items, which are produced from trees in the genusPrunusand are appreciated in a custom calledhanami. Springtime crowds flock to Japan to see, for ten points, what types of flowers, otherwise known assakura?	ANSWER:cherryblossoms (acceptsakurabefore mentioned; prompt on “cherry trees” before “trees” is read) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
This program was aided by the studies of research teams under Bill Moyers and Richard Goodwin. This program was first described in a speech at Ohio University, where it was claimed that “no child will go  unfed,  and  no  youngster  will  go  unschooled.”  Poll  taxes  were  outlawed  under  this  program’s  Voting Rights Act. Medicaid and Medicare were established under, for ten points, what set of domestic welfare programs under Lyndon B. Johnson?	ANSWER: GreatSociety
This event produced a list of banned books known as theIndex Librorum Prohibitorumand defined the  Canon  of  the  Bible  to  include  the  whole  of  the  Vulgate  and  exclude  Third  and  Fourth  Maccabees. The papal bullBenedictus Deusupheld the doctrines produced by this meeting, which was presided over by  both  Julius  III  and  Pius  IV.  This  meeting  set  the  number  of  sacraments  at  7  and  condemned  the 95 Theses of Martin Luther. For ten points, name this 16th century church council that denounced the Protestant Reformation.	ANSWER: Council of Trent
Description  acceptable.  Planners  decided  to  use  this  type  of  construction  for  Kansai  International Airport  to  avoid  noise  complaints  and  the  hassles  of  eminent  domain.  The  Palm  Jumeirah  is  this  type of construction in the Persian Gulf, found near similar constructions in the shape of the countries of the world on the Dubai coastline. The Chinese “Great Wall of Sand” plans to use, for ten points, what process to build additional ports and runways in the South China Sea?	ANSWER:  artificial islands  (accept  descriptions  related  to  “they  were  built  on  man-madeislands”; accept land dredgingor any other description of how an island might be built)
This war escalated when the desecration of the Hiera Orgas led to the passing of the harsh Megarian Decree. The Thirty Years’ Peace failed to create a lasting end to this war. One side in this war aimed to use the port of Piraeus to supply itself while defending from within the Long Walls, but that strategy was thwarted  after  it  lost  at  Aegospotami.  Plague  took  the  life  of  Pericles  during,  for  ten  points,  what  5th century BC war between Athens and Sparta?	ANSWER: PeloponnesianWar
A painting of this man also depicts Simon Fraser and many other people who weren’t actually present at the historical event in question. In that painting, a Native American resting his head on his chin views this man in a position similar to that of Christ after the Crucifixion. This man wears a red army coat and is being attended by a kneeling doctor in a blue coat. A Benjamin West painting depicts, for ten points, what British general who died at the 1759 Battle of Quebec?	ANSWER: James Wolfe(accept The Death of GeneralWolfe) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
This empire built sculptures of winged lions with human heads that were known as lamassu. Artifacts of this empire were excavated at Dur-Sharrukin, a former capital located in present-day Khorsabad. This empire besieged Hezekiah at Jerusalem during the reign of Sennacherib. A large ancient library was built by this empire’s ruler Ashurbanipal. For ten points, name this Iron Age empire centered at Nineveh.	ANSWER: Neo-AssyrianEmpire
This man’s son founded the first settlement by Spain in Uruguay while exploring the Rio de la Plata. The  John  Day  letter  recorded  this  man’s  voyages,  which  were  commemorated  by  a  tower  in  Bristol, England. This man commanded theMatthewto Cape Bonavista. The Vikings had previously reached the land that this man explored, which lies near Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia. For ten points, name this Genoan sailor who sailed for Henry VII to explore Canada for England.	ANSWER: John Cabot(or GiovanniCaboto)
One of these devices was co-developed by the developer of the Heimlich maneuver and the original voice actor of Tigger. At Wayne State University, one of these devices was used in a surgery on Henry Opitek after he was found to be suffering shortness of breath. The first of these devices was invented by Vladimir  Demikhov  while  experimenting  on  dogs.  One  of  these  devices  designed  by  Robert  Jarvik  has tubing  made  of  polyurethane  and  contains  pneumatically-fuelled  ventricles.  For  ten  points,  name  this medical device, a manmade version of a critical organ.	ANSWER: artificialhearts
This  battle  was  preceded  by  George  Crook’s  withdrawal  thanks  to  losses  at  Rosebud.  Frederick Benteen arrived in time to save Marcus Reno’s detachment during this battle, whose losing commander was knocked off his horse by Buffalo Calf Road Woman while his men were surrounded on a hilltop. The 7th Cavalry was annihilated in, for ten points, what 1876 victory for Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse?	ANSWER: Battle of theLittleBighorn(acceptCuster’sLastStand; accept Battle of theGreasy Grass)
This politician sent Robert Napier to rescue missionaries from Tewodros II in the punitive expedition to Abyssinia. Lionel de Rothschild loaned this man money to finance the purchase of the Suez Canal. This man authorized the Royal Titles act to name Queen Victoria as Empress of India and served as the only Jewish prime minister to date. For ten points, name this Conservative prime minister who rivaled William Gladstone in 19th century England.	ANSWER: BenjaminDisraeli Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
During this battle, Ulu ̧c[oo-looch] Ali was able to capture the standard of the Knights Hospitaller. The  Genoese  admiral  Andrea  Doria  fought  in  this  battle  after  a  defeat  at  the  Battle  of  Preveza.  Six powerful galleasses were provided by Venice to this battle’s winning side, which was commanded by Don John, the brother of the Holy Roman Emperor Philip II. For ten points, name this decisive 1571 naval victory for a Christian alliance, stopping the Ottoman advance into the Mediterranean Sea.	ANSWER: Battle of Lepanto
This  composer  set  texts  from  the  Book  of  Revelation  in  a  piece  celebrating  victory  in  the  Franco- Prussian War, hisTriumphlied. He quoted “Der Landesvater” and the drinking song “Gaudeamus Igitur” in  a  piece  written  to  celebrate  an  honorary  doctorate  from  the  University  of  Breslau.  Hans  von  Bulow called this man’s first symphony “Beethoven’s Tenth.” TheAcademic Festival Overturewas written by, for ten points, what German composer whoseWiegenlied [vee-gen-leed] is known as his “Lullaby?”	ANSWER: JohannesBrahms
Major John Brown’s failure to reinforce this man’s army in time resulted in Guy Carleton’s capture of this man at the Battle of Longue-Pointe. The day before Seth Warner took Fort Crown Point, this man and  Benedict  Arnold  led  a  successful  capture  of  a  fort  whose  weapons  helped  end  the  Siege  of  Boston. Fort Ticonderoga was captured by, for ten points, what leader of Vermont’s Green Mountain Boys?	ANSWER: Ethan Allen
A myth relates how this location was created after a king performed a thousand years of penance to break a curse on 60,000 brothers who had been incinerated. Millions of people journeyed to this location in February 2013 as part of a Kumbh Mela pilgrimage whose final destination was in Allahabad. Waters in this location are said to have purifying powers because they have touched Vishnu’s feet. For ten points, name this sacred river of Hinduism.	ANSWER: GangesRiver  (acceptGanga;  acceptAllahabadbefore  read;  prompt  on  India  and/or Bangladesh before “river” is read)
As  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  this  politician  introduced  a  budget  that  included  the  Cobden- Chevalier Treaty, lowering Anglo-French tariffs. As Prime Minister, he was able to secure the passage of a bill which benefited Irish tenants, but was never able to secure home rule during his four terms. This man’s  Midlothian  Campaign  attacked  his  rival,  a  Conservative  politician  with  a  close  friendship  with Queen Victoria. For ten points, name this Liberal Prime Minister who feuded with Benjamin Disraeli.	ANSWER: William Ewart Gladstone Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
This building was the site of an infamous jump by Franz Reichelt, whose parachute demonstration failed. This structure was derided as a “gigantic black smokestack” in a petition by the “Artists Protest,” which  attempted  to  stop  its  construction.  Maurice  Koechlin  and  Emile  Nouguier  helped  design  this structure, found on the Champ de Mars, for the World’s Fair of 1889. For ten points, name this iconic wrought iron tower in Paris.	ANSWER: EiffelTower
Description acceptable. The construction of this location at Mount Li was described by Sima Qian [chee-ahn], who noted that streams of mercury flowed through it in an attempt to recreate the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers. This location was first discovered by workers digging a well in Xiyang[shee-yahng]. To serve their master in the afterlife, thousands of terracotta warriors were placed in, for ten points, what resting place of the first emperor of unified China?	ANSWER:  TheMausoleumoftheFirstQinEmperor(accept  descriptions  ofQinShi  Huangdi’s mausoleum;  accept  QinShiHuangdi  in  place  of  “Qin;”  accept  equivalents  for  mausoleum,  such  as tomb,burialground,grave, etc)
This program gained support after a report by Herbert Hoover deemed it was infeasible to turn one nation into a “pastoral state” without the migration of 25 million people. This program, which replaced the punitive Morgenthau Plan, was announced at a Harvard commencement speech in 1947. Greece and Turkey received the first part of a disbursement of 13 billion dollars under, for ten points, what American foreign policy to help rebuild postwar Europe, named for the US Secretary of State?	ANSWER:MarshallPlan(acceptEuropeanRecoveryProgramorERP)
A medieval philosopher from this country was the first Westerner to record the formula for gunpowder in his Opus Majus. Another medieval philosopher from this country developed a “law of parsimony” that seeks  to  solve  problems  by  working  with  the  hypothesis  with  the  fewest  assumptions;  that  “razor”  was developed by William of Ockham. For ten points, name this home country of Roger Bacon where medieval scholars studied at the University of Oxford.	ANSWER: England(do not accept or prompt on other terms, like UK or (Great) Britain)
This organization partially titles the autobiography of its one-time leading member, George Plunkitt. This  group  aided  the  gubernatorial  campaign  of  John  Hoffman,  one  of  its  leaders  known  as  Grand Sachems.  This  organization,  which  declined  after  the  mayoral  election  of  Fiorello  La  Guardia  in  1934, achieved notoriety for its corruption and abuse of the spoils system under Boss Tweed. For ten points, name this New York City political machine.	ANSWER: TammanyHall Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
This man became greatly angry when he found his firstborn had slept with his concubine Bilhah. He gradually claimed the majority of his uncle’s flock of sheep and goats and married two of his daughters. This  man  was  born  grabbing  the  heel  of  his  twin  brother,  a  redheaded  hunter  who  was  tricked  into bequeathing his birthright to his man. For ten points, name this son of Isaac whose descendants formed the tribes of Israel.	ANSWER: Jacob(acceptIsraeluntil mentioned)
The Two Penny Act established that ministers be paid two pennies per pound of this commodity, a  move  which  led  to  Parson’s  Cause.  William  Cunningham  was  part  of  a  group  of  Glasgow  merchants known  as  the  “lords”  of  this  commodity.  The  Orinoco  variety  of  this  crop  dominated  Chesapeake  Bay, which was known as “this crop’s” coast. John Rolfe introduced this crop to Jamestown. For ten points, name this cash crop, used in the production of cigarettes.	ANSWER: tobacco
This man besieged a city after a revolt by Ibn Jahhaf killed the city’s ruler, al-Qadir. After defeat at the Battle of Sagrajas[sah-grah-has], Alfonso VI recalled this man from exile to command his armies. Sancho  II  of  Castile  made  this  man  his  standard-bearer  and  allowed  him  to  command  the  expedition against  Zaragoza.  This  man  established  an  independent  state  based  at  Valencia  after  defeating  the Almoravid Berbers during the Reconquista. For ten points, name this national hero of Spain.	ANSWER: ElCid(orRodrigoD ́ıazde Vivar orElCampeador)
Ken Khachigian, this President’s chief speechwriter, penned an apology speech for this man to deliver at Bergen-Belsen following his involvement in the Bitburg controversy. This man’s doctor replied “Today, Mr.  President,  we  are  all  Republicans”  after  he  survived  an  assassination  attempt  conducted  by  John Hinckley. This former President of the Screen Actors’ Guild was succeeded in office by his Vice President, George  H.W.  Bush.  For  ten  points,  name  this  conservative  U.S.  President  who  led  during  much  of  the 1980s.	ANSWER: Ronald Reagan
These people established a kingdom centered around Toulouse until they were forced out of France in the Battle of Vouille. The execution of the general Stilicho allowed these people to win a war against the weakened forces of Honorius. The emperor Valens was slain at Adrianople fighting against these people, who sacked Rome in 410 AD under the rule of Alaric. For ten points, name these Germanic peoples whose name implies that they came from the West.	ANSWER: Visigoths(prompt on Goths; prompt on Germanic people) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
A month-long hearing in  1954 ended  with this  man losing  his security clearance  due to  claims, by William  Borden,  of  Communist  ties.  This  man  chose  Norris  Bradbury  to  replace  him  as  Director  of  a laboratory that he left in 1945. This man pondered a quote from theBaghavad Gita, “Now I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds,” at the successful Trinity test. For ten points, name this head of the Los Alamos lab during World War II’s Manhattan Project.	ANSWER: Julius Robert Oppenheimer
This  was  the  surname  of  the  most  recent  Vice  President  to  die  in  office,  a  man  known  as  “Sunny Jim,” as well as the surname of a Treasury Secretary known as the “Ohio Icicle.” In 1884, a man with this surname said “I will not accept if nominated and will not serve if elected.” That man, a former Civil War general, was the brother of John, whose 1890 law was used to break up Standard Oil in 1911. For ten points, give this surname of an Ohio Senator who sponsored an early Antitrust Act and of General William Tecumseh.	ANSWER: Sherman(accept JamesSherman, JohnSherman, William (Tecumseh)Sherman)
Rain and this resource were mythologically provided to Wagadu by a black snake called Bida until a young man cut off its head. The “silent trade” often exchanged salt for this resource, which names an African colony that gained independence from Britain in 1957. When Mansa Musa traveled the Hajj, he distributed so much of this resource in Cairo that its prices remained depressed for many years. For ten points, name this precious metal once mined in the soil of Ghana.	ANSWER: gold
One work by this artist shows a man being attacked by owl-like demons, part of hisLos Caprichos series. This artist created a series of etchings of gruesome scenes following Napoleon’s invasion of his home country in the Peninsular War. In his old age, this artist began a series of paintings on the walls of his home, including one ofSaturn Devouring His Son. For ten points, name this Spanish artist who painted an execution scene inThe Third of May, 1808.	ANSWER: Francisco Goya
Finland is investigating claims that Rami Adham, this city’s “toy smuggler,” has misused charity donations. Fighting in this city has destroyed parts of the Al-Madina Souq district. Omar Daqneesh was photographed sitting in an ambulance after surviving an air strike in this city. In an interview on MSNBC, Libertarian Party candidate Gary Johnson was widely mocked after asking “What is [this city]?” For ten points, name this city in northern Syria, its most populous prior to the Syrian Civil War.	ANSWER: Aleppo(orHalab) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
Maurice  Brodie  developed  a  remedy  for  this  disease  while  a  research  assistant  at  NYU,  and  John Enders was awarded the 1954 Nobel for his cultivation of this virus in the lab.  The first live vaccine for this disease was tested at Letchworth Village in New York City.  One sufferer of this disease had a bathtub installed on theUSS  Iowafor its treatment and founded the March of Dimes.  For ten points, name this virus that paralyzed FDR.	ANSWER: poliomyelitis
Augustus the Strong was dethroned during this war, and one side in this war attacked in a blinding snowstorm, winning the Battle of Narva.  The turning point of this war saw General Adam Lewenhaupt and his Caroleans defeated while attempting to storm the Great Redoubt.  That battle forced the exile of the losing ruler, Charles XII. For ten points, name this war, mostly fought between Russia and Sweden, which saw the Battle of Poltava won by Peter the Great.	ANSWER:GreatNorthernWar
This  country  won  the  Battle  of  Breadfield,  and  it  failed  to  subjugate  Moldavia  after  the  Battle  of Baia.  One campaign led by a king of this country lifted a siege of Belgrade, and that king lost the Battle of Kosovo to an empire that would later conquer this country at the Battle of Mohacs [MO-hotch].  For ten points, name this country led by Janos[YAH-nosh] Hunyadi, which was conquered by Suleiman the Magnificent and was once in a personal union with Austria.	ANSWER:Hungary(acceptMagyarorzag)
This commodity is mined from sulfide ore in the Escondida near Antofagasta.  A mine for this metal and gold in Copiap ́o collapsed in 2010, trapping 33 miners for over two months.  The Atacama Desert is rich in this metal, making Chile the world’s leader in its production.  For ten points, name this conductive metal which alloys with tin to make bronze.	ANSWER:copper
Francis Heney prosecuted this city’s Mayor Eugene Schmitz in a series of 1908 graft trials.  William Ralston  constructed  the  Palace  Hotel  in  this  city,  which  was  later  burned  down  after  a  disaster  here killed the fire chief, Dennis Sullivan.  The neighborhoods of North Beach and Telegraph Hill in this city were  heavily  damaged  in  that  disaster,  which  featured  heavy  underreporting  of  casualties  in  this  city’s Chinatown district.  For ten points, name this California city which suffered a devastating earthquake in 1906.	ANSWER: SanFrancisco Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 6
This ruler, who described himself as the “Beloved of the Gods,” protected his power by assassinating his  half-brother  Susima.   This  patron  of  the  Great  Stupa  at  Sanchi  and  son  of  Bindusara  ruled  from Magadha.  His visions of bloodshed after winning the Kalinga War led him to convert to Buddhism.  For ten points, name this grandson of Chandragupta and emperor of the Mauryans.	ANSWER:Ashoka the Great
This  artist  sang  “We  met  as  soulmates  on  Parris  Island”  in  his  song  about  Vietnam  veterans, “Goodnight  Saigon.”  Another  song  from  his  albumThe  Nylon  Curtainwas  inspired  by  the  closing  of Bethlehem Steel in Allentown.  This Long Island resident rhymed “Bernie Goetz” with “homeless vets” in a  song  that  proclaimed  the  title  phenomenon  “was  always  burning  since  the  world’s  been  turning.”  for ten points, name this singer of “Movin’ Out” and “We Didn’t Start The Fire.”	ANSWER: Billy Joel
A  2003  dig  at  this  location  discovered  the  possible  grave  of  Bartholomew  Gosnold,  the  founder  of this  location’s  Charter  Company.   The  “Rude  Answer”  was  given  by  a  leader  of  this  colony,  who  was reinforced  by  Christopher  Newport.    It  was  burned  down  after  a  rebellion  against  William  Berkeley, Bacon’s Rebellion, and it was settled by a man who had his life apocryphally saved by Pocahontas.  For ten points, name this first permanent English settlement in the U.S., led by John Smith.	ANSWER: Jamestown
In  a  literary  work,  refugees  from  one  of  these  events  camp  out  at  a  villa  in  Fiesole[fee-AY-so-lay] for two weeks and tell stories that include one about “Patient Griselda.” People trying to stop this event wore masks with bird beaks,  and the Flagellants gained notoriety for their self-abuse during this event. Boccaccio’sDecameronis set during,  for ten points,  what epidemic in the 1300s that killed over thirty percent of Europe’s population?	ANSWER: bubonic plague(acceptBlackDeathorBlackPlague)
Suzanne Massie taught this politician to “trust, but verify.” As governor, he signed the Therapeutic Abortion Act and banned public carry of firearms with the Mulford Act.  As President, he launched an invasion to protect American medical students, Operation Urgent Fury, which deposed Maurice Bishop in Grenada.  For ten points, name this U.S. President who served as Governor of California after his acting career.	ANSWER: Ronald Reagan
In  this  U.S.  state,  a  team  of  death  row  inmates  played  baseball  as  the  "Alston's  All- Stars"  to  postpone  their  own  execution  date.  This  state's  Fort  Laramie  served  as  a  staging ground  for  army  offensives  during  the  Great Sioux  [[SOOH]]  Wars  of  the  1870s.  While  a territory, this modern state became the first to allow women to vote in its elections, leading to  its  nickname,  the  "Equality  State".  For  ten  points,  name  this  state  that,  since  1890,  has been governed from Cheyenne.	ANSWER: Wyoming
A  contingent  of  this  European  people  populated  the  Haitian  city  of  Cazale  [[kah- SAL]] after they betrayed Napoleon's troops. Over 20,000 officers and other intelligentsia of these people were murdered by the NKVD in the Katyn [[kah-TEEN]] Forest Massacre. With Hungarian  Michael  Kovats  [[KOH-vach]],  a  nobleman  of  this  nationality  named  Casimir Pulaski [[poo-WAH-skee]] reformed the American Cavalry Corps. For ten points, name these people who's country was invaded on September 1, 1939 to begin World War Two.	ANSWER: Poles (or Polish People; accept Polish-Americans; accept Polacy)
The  Transnational  Federal  Government  was  formed  in  2004  in  this  nation,  which was led by Siad Barre [[SEE-add BAR-reh]] from 1969 until 1991. An American response to civil  war  in  this  nation  turned  disastrous  when  two  Black  Hawk  helicopters  were  shot down. During the 2000s, this country was considered the home base of many pirates raiding shipping  near  the  Gulf  of  Aden.  For  ten  points,  name  this  war-torn  nation  on  the  horn  of Africa, once divided into British and Italian colonies.	ANSWER: Somalia (accept Federal Republic of Somalia; or Jamhuuriyadda Federaalka Soomaaliya; or Jumhūriyah as-Sūmāl al-Fīdirāliyah; prompt on "Somaliland")
The  melody  from  this  piece  was  used  as  Rhodesia's  National  Anthem  during  the 1970s,  and  was  also  played  for  German  Olympians  during  the  Cold  War.  Johannes  Brahms quoted this melody in one of his symphonies, and the original composer borrowed the lyrics from a Friedrich Schiller poem. Today, this piece of music is used as the Anthem of Europe, and  is  the melody  of  the  hymn Joyful, Joyful We Adore Thee.  For  ten  points, name  this  piece of music, the finale of Beethoven's 9th Symphony.	ANSWER: Ode to Joy (prompt on "Beethoven's 9th Symphony" or equivalents before mentioned)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 6
Faina  Vakhreva  was  the  wife  of  the  ruler  of  this  island,  whose  adopted  brother commanded a panzer division during the Anschluss of Austria. Before moving to this island, its  leader  created  the  "Gannan  New  Deal,"  where  civilians  could  talk  to  him  at  a  "public information desk." A ruler of this island arrested the "Rommel of the East," Sun Li-jen, under conspiracy  charges  during  the  KMT's  White  Terror.  For  ten  points,  Chiang  Ching  Kuo  and his father Chiang Kai Shek both controlled what East Asian island country?	ANSWER: Taiwan (accept Republic of China; or ROC)
A toxic pool labeled for this blight is shown in a political cartoon where men labelled "Mr.  Careless"  and  "Anti-Vaccinationist"  fall  off  a  cliff  titled  "Misinformation."  During  the Siege  of  Fort  Pitt,  Governor-General  Jeffrey  Amherst  oversaw  the  gift  of  several  blankets infected  with  this  disease  to  opposing Native  Americans.  Edward  Jenner inoculated  people against, for ten points, what disease that was eradicated in the 1970s?	ANSWER: Smallpox (accept Variola Major; or Variola Minor)
This  league's  color  barrier  was  broken  in  1947  by  Japanese-American  Wataru Misaka.  A  coach  in  this  league,  Steve  Kerr,  came  under  fire  in  2020  due  to  his  comments about Hong  Kong  and  the  role  of  the  Chinese  government.  In  2009,  the  owner  of  this league's Los Angeles Clippers was sued by former star Elgin Baylor on the grounds of racial discrimination. For ten points, name this league which mourned the death of Kobe Bryant in January 2020.	ANSWER: National Basketball Association (or NBA)
A  region  predominantly  made  of  these  geographical  features  called  "Al-Ahsa"  is known for producing high-quality bisht cloaks. One of these places, whose name translates to "Field of Trees," was the site of the Oracle of Amon, which confirmed Alexander the Great as  Pharaoh  of  Egypt.  The  Tuareg  confederations  used  these  geographical  features  as waypoints  while  on  Trans-Saharan  trade  routes.  Siwa  in  Egypt  is  an  example  of,  for  ten points, what fertile patches of land within deserts?	ANSWER: Oasis (or Oases; accept specifics like Siwa Oasis)
Like William Jennings Bryan, this man won a significant portion of electoral votes in multiple   elections   without   becoming   president.   This   man   negotiated   an   end   to   the Nullification   Crisis   with   his   contemporary,   John   Calhoun.   This   Whig   negotiated   the admission of California into the Union three decades after accomplishing a similar feat with Missouri. For ten points, name this "Great Compromiser" from Kentucky.	ANSWER: Henry Clay Sr.  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 6
The site of this city was purchased from the Mississauga by Lord Dorchester, though it remained unsettled until Governor John Graves Sicmoe established the town of York. John Strachan negotiated this town's surrender to the Americans in the War of 1812, after which it  was  the  site  of  Government  House  on  two  occasions  before  it  was  moved  to  another location. William Lyons Mackenzie was the first mayor of this city until he abandoned it to lead the Upper Canada Rebellion. The Canadian National Railway built the CN Tower in, for ten points, which Ontario metropolis?	ANSWER: Toronto (accept York before mentioned)   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 6
This man received a boost in the polls after he was accused of needing “some kind of Gestapo” to fulfill his policies. This man won an election on the slogan “Let Us Face the Future” and subsequently passed the National Insurance Act on the advice of the Beveridge Report. The British welfare state began under this man, who chartered the creation of the National Health Service. The Potsdam Conference was attended  by,  for  ten  points,  what  Prime  Minister  who  replaced  Winston  Churchill  at  the  end  of  World War II?	ANSWER: Clement Attlee
This man, who gave the controversial Gazimestan speech, came to power after the “Rallies of Truth,” where  his  supporters  launched  the  “anti-bureaucratic  revolution.”  This  man’s  downfall  began  when  a wheel-loader rammed a government building, giving the Bulldozer Revolution its name. In part because he failed to restrain the actions of commander Ratko Mladic, this man was indicted at the Hague, but he died of heart disease in 2006 before he could be tried. For ten points, name this president of Serbia during the Balkan Wars.	ANSWER: Slobodan Milosevic
During  the  Civil  War,  cannons  named  for  these  people  were  nothing  more  than  disguised  logs. Members of this group included abolitionist Anthony Benezet and a “Fighting” major general who lost the  Battle  of  Guilford  Courthouse.  Nathanael  Greene  was  a  member  of  this  religious  group,  which  was founded  by  George  Fox.  For  ten  points,  name  this  pacifist  religious  group,  also  called  the  Society  of Friends, whose members included William Penn.	ANSWER: Quakers (acceptSocietyofFriendsbefore mentioned)
After a meeting with Henry Morgenthau, this man produced a film based on the ideas of air superiority purported by Alexander de Seversky. This man, who hired a writing corps known as the “Nine Old Men,” produced  a  film  that  includes  a  dream  sequence  set  in  a  Nazi  factory  and  salutes  to  Hitler.  Leopold Stokowski conducted the Philadelphia Orchestra for an animated film by, for ten points, what animator and producer ofDer Fuehrer’s FaceandFantasia, which star Donald Duck and Mickey Mouse?	ANSWER: Walt Disney
This ruler was adopted by the empress Ruqaiya after a soothsayer claimed he would be a great ruler. This man was forced to watch his sons fight for his kingdom at Samurgh after an illness led Dara Shikoh to be named regent. In his final years, this man was confined in the Red Fort, which he had built. This father  of  Aurangzeb  became  known  for  constructing  a  white  mausoleum  for  his  wife,  Mumtaz.  For  ten points, name this Mughal emperor who built the Taj Mahal.	ANSWER: Shah Jahan(accept Shahab-ud-din MuhammadKhurram) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
Lewis  Schwellenbach  succeeded  this  figure,  who  had  an  affair  with  Mary  Harriman  Rumsey,  the founder  of  the  Junior  League,  until  her  death.  After  the  Triangle  Shirtwaist  Factory  fire,  this  woman served as executive secretary for the New York Committee on Public Safety. Eleanor Roosevelt and this woman oversaw the development of She-She-She Camps during the New Deal. This drafter of the Social Security Act of 1935 was the first woman in the line of presidential succession. For ten points, name this Secretary of Labor under Franklin D. Roosevelt, the first female member of the Cabinet.	ANSWER: Frances Perkins
A poem set during this war describes how “The larks, still bravely singing, fly / Scarce heard amid the guns below.” In a poem about this war, a man imagines a dying man’s “hanging face, like a devil’s sick of sin,” after describing an “ecstasy of fumbling” after the cries of “Gas! GAS!” A John McCrae poem about this war opens “In Flanders fields the poppies blow.” For ten points, name this war, the subject of Wilfred Owen’s “Dulce et Decorum Est,” which was written while in the hospital suffering from shell shock.	ANSWER: WorldWarI(accept theGreatWar)
In a book focusing on this event, Rosa Luxembourg described it as a “complete failure.” John Reed’s reporting on this event provided the basis for his bookTen Days that Shook the World. A blank was fired by theAuroraduring an attack on the Winter Palace during this event, which occurred months after a Provisional Government was established following a similar event in February. The Bolsheviks planned, for ten points, what autumn 1917 Russian revolution?	ANSWER:OctoberRevolution(acceptRussianRevolutionof1917until “John Reed” is read, and prompt  after;  accept BolshevikRevolutionuntil  “Bolshevik”  is  read,  and  prompt  after;  prompt  on “Russian Revolution”)
This  architect  designed  a  forking  glass  extension  for  the  Ordrupgaard  museum  in  Denmark  and created a pulley system to retract the fabric portion of a roof inspired by the sails of Dhow boats for the Al  Janoub  Stadium  in  Qatar.  This  architect  designed  the  London  Aquatics  Center  in  her  home  nation and was hired to design a Central Bank building in Baghdad, her birth city, shortly before her death in 2016. For ten points, name this Iraqi-British architect, the first woman to win the Royal Gold Medal for architecture and the Pritzker Prize.	ANSWER: Dame Zaha (Mohammad) Hadid
The  first  restrictive  regulation  on  this  action  was  the  Page  Act,  whose  intent  was  reversed  sixty years  later  by  the  Magnuson  Act.  This  action  was  carried  out  through  the  McCorkell  Line  during  the Irish Potato Famine. A “gentleman’s agreement” under Teddy Roosevelt limited this action from Japan. Many people who performed this action were processed at Angel and Ellis Islands. For ten points, name this action that increases the population of the United States.	ANSWER: immigrationto the United States (accept answers that indicate any country of origin, even though China, Ireland, and/or Japan are the only ones clued) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
After this event, Hyman Rickover testified that no “simple, easy gimmick” explains why his program had never experienced an event like this disaster. Former Dartmouth President John Kemeny chaired a commission investigating this event. William Scranton falsely reported that Metropolitan Edison claimed that “everything was under control” after this event, which occurred at a facility named for its distance from  Middletown,  Pennsylvania.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1979  accident,  the  worst  nuclear  disaster  in American history.	ANSWER: ThreeMileIslandnuclear accident (or disaster, meltdown, etc.)
During this battle, theMarquesawas sent out ahead to prevent attacks from light ships. The fall of the Famagusta colony preceded this battle, which brought an end to one side’s attempt to rescue Cyprus. TheReal [ray-AHL] rammed the flagship of Uluc Ali Pasha at the height of this battle. Miguel Cervantes lost an arm in this battle, which was a decisive victory for Don Juan of Austria. For ten points, name this 1571 battle where the Holy League defeated the Ottomans.	ANSWER: Battle ofLepanto
In 1944, a ship named for this figure ran aground on a sandbank in the Thames Estuary; its masts rise above the water, and it still holds nearly 3 million pounds of live explosives. Benedict Arnold replaced this man as leader of an invasion after he was killed by a burst of grapeshot to the head and thighs, contrary to the musicalHamilton, which claimed he “took a bullet in the neck in Quebec.” For ten points, name this Irishman who fought for the colonists during the American Revolution, leading the 1775 invasion of Canada.	ANSWER: Richard Montgomery
This  man  once  wrote  a  letter  to  New  York  Congressman  John  J.  LaFalce  complaining  of  how  “a woman  can’t  even  carry  Mace  in  her  purse.”  This  man,  who  called  for  the  murder  of  Lon  Horiuchi  for killing of the wife of Randy Weaver, rented a Ryder truck to carry out an attack that was co-plotted by Terry  Nichols.  Over  160  people  were  killed  in  a  1995  attack  by,  for  ten  points,  what  domestic  terrorist who bombed the Alfred P. Murrah building in Oklahoma City?	ANSWER: Timothy McVeigh
The “bat-wing” floor plan that once characterized these places was described in the Kirkbride design. After  a  Quaker  woman  died  in  one  of  these  places,  William  Tuke  founded  the  York  Retreat,  which developed  the  “moral  treatment”  method  used  in  these  places.  The  reform  of  jails,  schools,  and  these institutions was promoted by Dorothea Dix before she worked as a nurse in the Civil War. For ten points, name these facilities where patients with disorders like schizophrenia were often abused in 19th century America.	ANSWER: psychiatrichospitals (ormentalhospitals ormentalasylums; acceptinsaneasylums; prompt on “hospitals” or “asylums”) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
This  treaty  was  signed  by  the  British  and  Dutch  after  an  agreement  to  terminate  the  successful Ostend  trading  company.  This  treaty  was  devised  in  an  attempt  to  break  an  agreement  of  shared  rule with Joseph I’s bloodline, the Mutual Pact of Succession. Since this agreement violated Salic Law, it was broken shortly after Charles VI’s death. For ten points, name this 1713 agreement that allowed for Maria Theresa to ascend the Habsburg throne.	ANSWER: PragmaticSanctionof 1713
In 1957, this musician canceled a Soviet Union tour in solidarity with the Little Rock Nine. Kid Ory was part of this musician’s “Hot Five” band, which added Pete Briggs and drummer Al Dodds to become the “Hot Seven” in 1927. This man, the first jazz musician to reach the cover of Time magazine, won a Grammy in 1964 for his performance of “Hello, Dolly!” For ten points, name this legendary jazz trumpeter and singer of “What a Wonderful World,” known as Satchmo.	ANSWER: LouisArmstrong
This  leader,  who  was  nicknamed  “the  pineapple”  for  his  heavy  acne,  was  the  target  of  Operation Nifty Package, in which Linda Ronstadt’s “You’re No Good” and “Welcome to the Jungle” by Guns N’ Roses were blared outside the Vatican embassy. This leader, who took power two years after the death of Omar Torrijos, was overthrown in Operation Just Cause after his role as a conduit for Colombian drug cartels was revealed. For ten points, name this military dictator of Panama.	ANSWER: Manuel Noriega
Jesse  Elliot  was  the  second-in-command  during  this  battle,  whose  combatants  included  theQueen Charlotteand theCaledonia. This battle was preceded by a ten day blockade of Presque Isle. One leader in  this  battle  transferred  his  command  to  theNiagaraafter  his  original  ship,  the  USSLawrence,  was destroyed by enemy fire. Upon his victory in this battle, that leader wrote to his superior that “We have met the enemy and they are ours.” For ten points, name this 1813 naval victory for Oliver Hazard Perry at a namesake Great Lake.	ANSWER: Battle of LakeErie(accept Battle ofPut-in-Bay)
This city used a luxury tax to keep rents artificially low in public housing projects like the enormous Karl-Marx-Hof  during  a  period  from  1918-34  in  which  this  city  was  nicknamed  “Red.”  Moritz  Schlick organized an influential intellectual group in this city around 1918; that group, which included members like Godel and Carnap, advocated for logical empiricism and was called this city’s Circle. For ten points, name this home city of Sigmund Freud, the capital of Austria.	ANSWER: Vienna(orWien) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
In the aftermath of this event, the British government allowed the Kindertransport program to be set up by the Refugee Children’s Movement. A speech noting that demonstrations “should not be prepared or  organized”  but  “are  not  to  be  hampered”  helped  fuel  this  event,  which  was  triggered  after  Herschel Grynszpan  assassinated  diplomat  Ernst  vom  Rath.  SA  Brownshirts  carried  out,  for  ten  points,  what massive attack on the night of November 9, 1938 against Jewish stores and synagogues in Germany?	ANSWER: Kristallnacht(or theNightofBrokenGlass)
After  this  complex  was  sacked  by  Chams,  it  was  replaced  in  function  by  the  nearby  Bayon.  This complex is the site of a bas-relief showing Vasuki being pulled by 92 asuras and 88 devas in the “Churning of the Sea of Milk.” This complex was built to resemble Mount Meru and dedicated to Vishnu as a Hindu temple by Suryavarman II, but was later transformed into a Buddhist temple. For ten points, name this Khmer temple complex in Cambodia.	ANSWER: AngkorWat
An 1869 Supreme Court case involving this state held that its bond sales during the Civil War were invalid. The Gun Free School Zones Act was ruled unconstitutional in a case arising from this state,US v. Lopez. The Supreme Court overturnedBowers v. Hardwickin a 2003 case that struck down this state’s anti-sodomy laws. Abigail Fisher challenged the affirmative action program of, for ten points, what state that admits the top ten percent of each of its high school’s students to its main campus in Austin?	ANSWER: Texas(acceptTexasv.  White;  accept  Lawrence  v.Texasafter  “Bowers”  is  read;  accept Fisher v. University of Texasafter “Abigail” is read)
In this country, independence leader and human rights activist Hannah Kudjoe created an anti-nudity campaign and distributed clothes. Operation Cold Chop deposed a ruler of this country who was part of the Big Six and founded the Convention People’s Party. The “Motion of Destiny” speech called for the independence of this nation, where the Akosombo dam was built on the Volta River by Kwame Nkrumah. The  British  colony  of  Gold  Coast  controlled  what  is  now,  for  ten  points,  what  West  African  country governed from Accra?	ANSWER: Ghana
During this war, a group of soldiers under Thomas Wheeler were ambushed and besieged at Brookfield. This war erupted after a group of men were hung for their supposed role in the murder of John Sassamon. The Great Swamp Fight occurred in this war, during which one side was led by the chieftain Metacomet. The Wampanoag fought against colonists in New England in, for ten points, what 17th century war named after a royal moniker?	ANSWER: KingPhilip’s War (acceptFirstIndianWar; acceptMetacomet’s War before “Metacomet” is read; accept rebellion and other equivalent terms for war) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
One  of  these  animals  is  shown  carried  on  someone’s  shoulders  in  the  Catacombs  of  Priscilla.  The bottom-central panel of a Van Eyck work shows one of these animals circled by angels and bleeding into a goblet, known as theAdorationof aMysticone of these animals. This animal symbolizes Jesus’ sacrifice in the Ghent Altarpiece’s depiction of theAgnus Dei. For ten points, name this herd animal that is often shown in artistic depictions of the Good Shepherd.	ANSWER: lambs (orsheep; acceptAgnusDei before mentioned)
This ruler forced Catus Decianus to flee to Gaul after a decisive victory at Great Wratting. This ruler defeated Quintus Cerialis at Camulodunum after launching a campaign in response to Roman refusal to honor the will of Prasutagus, but the eventual arrival of Suetonius led to this ruler’s defeat at Watling Street near Londinium. The Nero-era revolt of the Iceni was led by, for ten points, what queen who fought the Romans over control of Britain in AD 60?	ANSWER:Boudica
This state’s Barataria Nature Reserve and Chalmette Battlefield are administered together as part of  the  Jean  Lafitte  National  Historical  Park.  A  so-called  “country”  in  this  state,  centered  around  the Atchafalaya  River  and  the  city  of  Lafayette,  was  settled  by  French  speakers  who  were  removed  from present-day Nova Scotia in the Great Expulsion. Cajuns settled in, for ten points, what state that contains the Mississippi River Delta and was the site of the 1815 Battle of New Orleans?	ANSWER: Louisiana
This politician dueled fellow state representative Humphrey Marshall after a spat regarding British cloth.  As  Speaker,  this  man  succeeded  in  convincing  Southern  representatives  to  adopt  the  Thomas Proviso, while also convincing Northern representatives to allow Missouri’s admission into the Union as a slave state. This coiner of the term “American System” negotiated a “corrupt bargain” that resulted in John Quincy Adams’ elevation to the presidency. For ten points, name this Kentucky politician known as the Great Compromiser.	ANSWER: Henry Clay
This leader was embroiled in scandal after his wife was linked to a super-nationalistic kindergarten. This man proposed a new holiday, Restoration of Sovereignty Day, first celebrated in 2013. This leader planned  an  increase  in  the  consumption  tax  as  part  of  the  Three  Arrows,  his  signature  economic  plan. This leader rules in partnership with the Komeito Party and succeeded Junichiro Koizumi in his current post. For ten points name this current prime minister of Japan.	ANSWER: Shinzo Abe([ah-bay], but be lenient) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
During a conflict in this region, one commander was baited into aiding the Aedui and was promptly defeated at the battle of Gergovia. The Arverni’s resistance in this region broke after an enemy used the tactics of circumvallation and contravallation at the siege of Alesia. This region was divided into Cisalpine and  Transalpine  sectors  and  was  conquered  by  Julius  Caesar  in  50  BC.  Vercingetorix  ruled  in,  for  ten points, what Roman province in modern-day France?	ANSWER: Gaul(prompt on France before mentioned)
For  their  opposition  to  one  of  these  laws  in  2011,  Kansas  Secretary  of  State  Kris  Kobach  called the  ACLU  “communists”  in  2016.  A  Loyola  law  study  found  31  cases  “out  of  a  billion”  where  these laws would have applied. In July 2016, one of these laws in North Carolina was struck down because it was targeting African-Americans with “surgical precision.” For ten points, name these laws that aim to prevent fraudulent behavior at the voting booth.	ANSWER: voterIDlaws (accept descriptions of laws that requirevoters to provide any type of personal identification; prompt on partial answers or descriptions)
This  man  blamed  stray  American  searchlights  for  providing  vision  for  his  enemy’s  guns  at  Agua Prieta.  This  post-Madero  head  of  the  Divisi ́on  del  Norte  worked  with  Emiliano  Zapata  to  overthrow Venustiano Carranza. George Patton was among the leaders of a force sent to capture this man following his cross-border raid on Columbus, New Mexico. “Blackjack” Pershing failed to kill, for ten points, what general of the Mexican revolution?	ANSWER: Francisco “Pancho” Villa
An author from this country described spending seventeen months in a waiting line outside her son’s prison in her poemRequiem. Parasha dies during a flood in this country, causing the man who loved her to descend into madness in a poem named after an equestrian statue. For ten points, name this setting of “The Bronze Horseman,” the home country of poet Anna Akhmatova and the author of the verse novel Eugene Onegin, Alexander Pushkin.	ANSWER: Russia(acceptSovietUnionorUSSRorUnionofSovietSocialistRepublics; accept CCCPorSoyuzSovetskikhSotsialisticheskikhRespublik)
The downtown of one city in this state was flooded in 1913 by the Great Miami River. A 1995 accord reached in this state ended the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Another river in this state caught fire several times, most famously in 1969. The northeastern portion of this state, once claimed by Connecticut as the Western Reserve, is home to the Cuyahoga River. For ten points, name this midwestern state, home to Dayton, Columbus, and Cleveland.	ANSWER: Ohio Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
This figure’s body was found in the Tallahatchie River, weighed down by a heavy fan.Jetpublished images  of  this  figure’s  funeral,  at  which  his  mother  insisted  on  an  open  casket.  After  an  all-white  jury acquitted  J.W.  Milam  and  Roy  Bryant  of  murdering  this  figure,  they  freely  admitted  their  guilt  in  an interview withLookmagazine. For ten points, name this 14-year-old from Chicago who was murdered in Mississippi in 1955.	ANSWER: Emmett Till
One ruler with name was the subject of the “Royal Question” and was forced to abdicate by Jean Duvieusart’s government. Otto of Wittelsbach became King of Greece when another ruler of this name rejected that position. The Casement Report details atrocities that occurred under another ruler of this name, who used the Force Publique[puh-BLEEK] to enforce rubber quotas for workers in the Congo. For ten points, give this name shared by three Belgian Kings.	ANSWER:L ́eopold(accept any/all ofL ́eopoldI, II, or III)
TheKuttabulwas sunk in a harbor in this country by three raiding midget submarines. A commander of  this  country’s  forces,  Selwyn  Porter,  oversaw  a  series  of  defensive  retreats  in  the  Kokoda  Track campaign. During World War II, this country was led by John Curtin and Robert Menzies. The Battle of Coral Sea effectively ended Japanese plans to isolate and invade this country. For ten points, name this Allied country that endured assaults on its harbors of Darwin and Sydney.	ANSWER: Australia
Four children of the More family were boarded onto this ship after their mother was embroiled in an adultery  scandal  involving  Jakob  Blakeway.  Christopher  Jones  was  the  captain  of  this  ship,  which  was originally  intended  to  be  accompanied  on  an  ocean  crossing  by  theSpeedwell.  The  journals  of  William Bradford preserve a governing document or compact named for this ship. For ten points, name this ship that established the Plymouth Colony after landing at Cape Cod.	ANSWER: Mayflower
In  order  to  perform  this  action,  numerous  U.S.  Presidents  have  joined  the  Burning  Tree  Club in  Bethesda,  Maryland.  In  April  1961,  John  F.  Kennedy  gave  a  Secret  Service  agent  a  head  injury by  performing  this  action  badly.  After  repeatedly  poorly  performing  this  action,  Dwight  Eisenhower demanded the removal of a tall pine tree at Augusta National. For ten points, name this common athletic activity for U.S. Presidents, especially Eisenhower, who installed the White House putting green.	ANSWER:golfing  (accept  anything  related  to  golf,  including  more  specific  responses,  like  swinging  a golfclub,teeingoff, etc.) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
Wesley Osmus was drowned by the losing side in this battle.  Victory in this battle was made possible by the cracking of the JN-25 code, completed with a ruse regarding water purification systems.  William Halsey’s  illness  forced  Raymond  Spruance  to  take  command  during  this  battle,  in  which  four  Japanese aircraft carriers were sunk.  For ten points, name this 1942 battle near a namesake atoll, often identified as a turning point in the Pacific theater.	ANSWER: Battle of Midway
In this film, Brad Kane and Lea Salonga sing a duet that won an Oscar for Best Original Song.  After marketing disputes, Dan Castellaneta replaced one voice actor in this film’s first sequel.  Thirty percent of respondents to a December 2015 PPP poll supported bombing Agrabah, this movie’s setting, where Jafar seeks a magic lamp.  Robin Williams voiced the Genie in, for ten points, what 1992 Disney film adapted fromThe Arabian Nights?	ANSWER:Aladdin
This river is crossed by the John Frost Bridge, which replaced a structure fought over in the Battle of Arnhem during Operation Market Garden.  For many years, the Roman Empire’s Germanic frontier began at the Danube and this river, which also forms Liechtenstein’s western border.  For ten points, name this longest river entirely within Western Europe, which flows from the Alps through Germany to the North Sea.	ANSWER: RhineRiver (orRijnRiver)
This man converted to his religion after listening to the preaching of Thomas Loe.  This man wrote Innocency with Her Open Face, which led him to be imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he wrote No Cross, No Crown.  This man signed a treaty with the Lenape tribe,  granting him land for a colony governed  by  his  Frame  of  Government.   For  ten  points,  name  this  Quaker  who  founded  an  American colony and its city of Philadelphia.	ANSWER: William Penn
The world’s first openly lesbian prime minister was elected in this country, which saw the Kitchenware Revolution after all three of its largest banks collapsed in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis.  This nation’s  Althing  is  the  world’s  oldest  existing  parliamentary  institution.   Massive  air  travel  disruptions across Europe resulted from the 2010 eruption of the Eyjafjallajokull [EYE-a-fyat-la-yo-kutl] volcano in this country.  For ten points, name this Scandinavian island nation whose capital is Reykjavik.	ANSWER:Iceland Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 7
This  empire  defeated  Linghu  Chao’s  rebels  in  its  successful  defense  of  Yongqiu[yong-chu].   Huang Chao’s rebels against this dynasty slaughtered tens of thousands of foreigners in Guangzhou in 878.  This dynasty’s  power  was  interrupted  by  Wu  Zetian’s  brief  Second  Zhou  Dynasty  and  by  the  An  Lushan rebellion.  Emperor Gaozu founded, for ten points, what Chinese dynasty that preceded the Song Dynasty?	ANSWER:Tangdynasty
Charles  Michelson,  the  head  of  the  DNC,  coined  the  term  for  these  settlements  in  1931,  and  a reservoir where Central Park’s Great Lawn would be built was home to one of the most prominent of these locations.  One of these locations in Anacostia Flats was cleared out by Douglas MacArthur to remove the Bonus Army from Washington, D.C. in 1932.  For ten points, name these shantytowns formed during the Great Depression, which were named for the predecessor to Franklin Roosevelt.	ANSWER: Hoovervilles (prompt on descriptions of slums, shantytowns, etc.)
This  man  started  the  Informbiro  period  after  his  country  was  expelled  from  the  Cominform  in 1948  after  feuding  with  Joseph  Stalin,  and  this  leader  was  the  only  European  who  helped  create  the Non-Aligned Movement, serving as its first Secretary-General.  This man’s country consisted of six socialist republics including Slovenia, Croatia, and Serbia.  For ten points, name this longtime Communist ruler of Yugoslavia.	ANSWER: Josip Tito
An  empire  situated  in  this  modern  day  country  was  overthrown  by  the  Sosso  people  after  taking its  capital  at  Koumbi  Saleh.   This  country  was  home  to  the  Ashanti  Kingdom  and  is  the  birthplace  of Kofi Annan.  This was the first sub-Saharan African country to gain independence from a colonial power. Kwame Nkrumah led, for ten points, what country formerly known as the Gold Coast with capital Accra?	ANSWER: Ghana
The  election  of  Daniel  O’Connell  led  this  man  to  pass  the  1829  Catholic  Relief  Act.   This  man became Governor of Seringapatam after winning in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War, and he later led forces at the Battle of Salamanca during the Peninsular War.  Along with Gebhard von Blucher, this man won a battle that ended one French emperor’s return to power.  For ten points, name this British general who won over Napoleon at Waterloo.	ANSWER: DukeofWellingtonorArthurWellsleyor ArthurWesley
This   politician   dubbed   the   Smedley   Butler-alleged   "Business   Plot"   a   "Cocktail Putsch."  This  man's  first  act  in  office  was  to  order  the  arrest  of  gangster  "Lucky"  Luciano, just  before  this  man  instituted  a  ban  on  the  sale  of artichokes.  This  collaborator  of  Robert Moses curbed the strength of Tammany Hall and was the first Italian-American to serve as mayor  of  a  major  city.  A  Queens  airport  is  named  for,  for  ten  points  which  New  York  City mayor during the 1930s and '40s?	ANSWER: Fiorello La Guardia
This  country  was  governed  by  flight  lieutenant  Jerry  Rawlings  following  a  1981 coup  against  the  Convention  People's  Party.  This  country  became  the  first  colony  in  sub- Saharan  Africa  to  achieve  sovereignty  under  the  regime  of  Kwame  Nkrumah  [[KWAH-meh en-KROO-muh]]. The only Black Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan [[KOH- fee  ah-NAHN]],  was  originally  from  this  country.  The  Ashanti  once  dominated,  for  ten points, what West African country ruled by Britain as the Gold Coast colony?	ANSWER: Republic of Ghana (prompt on "Gold Coast" before mentioned")
This  man's  illegitimate  son  Don  John  pacified  a  rebellion  of  former  Muslims  in Alpujarras [[al-poo-HAH-rahs]] and led a fleet which included a young Miguel De Cervantes [[sehr-VAHN-tehs]].  This  Holy  Roman  Emperor  outlawed  Martin  Luther's  teachings  in  the Diet  of  Worms  [[VURMS]],  and  he  deployed conquistadores like  Hernán  Cortés  to  the  New World.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Habsburg  Emperor  of  Spain  and  Austria,  the  father of Phillip II.	ANSWER: Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor (accept Carlos V; or Karl V; accept Charles I of Spain; or Carlos I de España; or Charles II of Burgundy; or Charles II de Bourgogne)
During  the  investigation of  this event,  which  had many  indirect  links  to  the  Elohim [[EH-loh-heem]]  City  compound,  Michael  Brescia  [[BREH-shah]]  was  briefly  detained  on suspicion  of  being  the  so-called  "John  Doe  2."  Charles  Porter  took  an  iconic  photograph  of the  aftermath  of  this  event.  The  Alfred  P.  Murrah  Federal  Building  was  targeted  in  this event,  for  which  Terry  Nichols  was  sentenced  to  life  in  prison.  For  ten  points,  Timothy McVeigh  was  executed  as  the  main  perpetrator  of  what  April  1995  act  of  right-wing terrorism?	ANSWER: Oklahoma City Bombing (accept similar answers for “Bombing” such as “Attack”; accept answers that indicate the attack on the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building before it is mentioned)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 7
Despite  Social  Democrat  attempts  at  moderating  this  government,  radicals  such  as Alfred  Hugenberg  [[HYOO-gen-berg]],  Ernst  Thalmann's  Red  Front,  and  the  Brownshirts played a key role in bringing it down. In 1932, this government's presidential election saw a World War  One general,  Paul  von  Hindenburg, claim  victory. This government  fell  after its parliament  burned  down,  leading  to  the  Reichstag  Fire  Decree.  For  ten  points,  name  this democratic German government.	ANSWER: Weimar Republic (or Weimarer Republik; accept German Republic or Deutsche Republik before "German" is mentioned; accept "Reich" in place of "Republic")
John Hyrcanus [[heer-KAH-nooss]] subjugated and converted Itureans [["eye"-TOO- ree-ans]] to this faith after a prolonged campaign. Two scholars of this faith who convinced the Himyarite [[HIM-yah-rite]] king Abu Karib to lift his siege of Yathrib later facilitated his conversion to this faith. The kingdom of Judah's fall to Nebuchadnezzar's [[NEH-boo-kahd- ZEH-zars]]  forces  led  to  a  period  experienced  by  this  faith's  adherents  known  as  the Babylonian Captivity. For ten points, name this dominant faith of the Israelites.	ANSWER: Judaism (accept Jewish Faith; or Jews)
A  subspecies of  this animal  named for  the  London Underground is  thought  to  have caused a human encephalitis [[en-seh-fah-LAI-tiss]] outbreak in New York City. A "wooden wonder"  manufactured  by  de  Havilland  and  named  for  this  animal  was  a  high-speed  light bomber used in World War Two. A Central American coastal kingdom that shares its name with this animal became a British protectorate before being annexed by Nicaragua. A major vector for  historical  and  modern  diseases  like  Yellow  Fever  and  Malaria  is,  for  ten  points, what blood-sucking insect?	ANSWER: Mosquitoes (accept Culicidae; accept London Underground Mosquitoes; accept Mosquito Coast)
Germany  long  resisted  the  implementation of  this  policy  until  the  SPD  made  it  the key point of coalition negotiations in 2013. A 1994 article by Alan Kreuger and David Card found  that  differences  in  this  policy  between  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  did  not  affect employment rates. This policy was first implemented in the U.S. by the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and was last changed in 2007 at the federal level when it was set at $7.25. For ten points, name this lowest legally allowed rate for hourly labor compensation.	ANSWER: Minimum wage (prompt on descriptive answers)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 7
The Münzmeister [[MOONTS-my-stuh]]  were  heads  of  one  of  these  facilities  first established  in  the  Carolingian  [[kay-roh-LIN-jee-an]]  Empire,  usually  coming  from  the burgher class. In ancient Rome, these institutions evolved from the Temples of Juno Moneta. The  oldest  of  these  buildings  was  likely  in  Lydia  [[LID-ee-ah]]  and  produced  items  made from  electrum.  The  Fugio  Cent  was  made  by  the  United  States'  first  example  of  these institutions.  Often  incorporating  images  of  rulers  and  presidents,  for  ten  points,  what institutions produce coins?	ANSWER: Mints (accept Moneyers; prompt on "banks"; prompt on descriptive answers involving making money)
The Wadai Sultanate annexed a kingdom southeast of this body of water which was ruled by "Mbang" kings and was called Bagirmi. Ibn Furtu chronicled the military exploits of a Mai of  an empire  near  this  body  of  water  named Idris  Alooma.  This  lake shares  its name with  a  country  which  with  Libya  fought  the  Toyota  War  over  the  Aouzu  Strip.  This  lake  in the  Sahel  has  shrunk  by  95%  since  1960.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  lake  that  names  a country governed from N’Djamena [[uhn-jah-MAY-nuh]].	ANSWER: Lake Chad   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 7
This  man  was  legendarily  forced  to  sell  his  belongings  after  his  son  Caeso  fled  to  the  Etruscans. Barbatus called upon this man to thwart Spurius Maelius’ plans to buy the crown of Rome in 439 BC. This man, who rose to his highest post after the Aequi attacked Tusculum, was victorious at the Battle of Mount Algidus, after which he chose to return to his farm and resigned his dictatorial powers just fifteen days after receiving them. For ten points, name this famously honorable Roman statesman who inspired the name of a city in Ohio.	ANSWER: Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus
A protest against this treaty in Hibiya Park resulted in 17 deaths and the destruction of over 300 buildings.  A  General  Stores  Building  was  the  site  of  the  negotiations  of  this  treaty,  whose  delegates included Roman Rosen. In this treaty, the Liaodong Peninsula was ceded to a side represented by Komura Jutaro,  while  Port  Arthur  and  half  of  Sakhalin  were  given  to  a  country  represented  by  Sergei  Witte. Teddy Roosevelt helped mediate, for ten points, what 1905 treaty ending the Russo-Japanese War?	ANSWER: Treaty of Portsmouth
This  man  argued  that  the  infinite  sin  of  Adam  could  only  be  atoned  for  by  the  infinite  sacrifice of  Jesus  inCur  Deus  Homo.  The  monk  Gaunilo  refuted  one  of  this  man’s  ideas  with  the  example  of  a mythical  island.  This  man  argued  that  God  is  the  greatest  possible  being,  and  therefore  must  exist,  in hisProslogion. The ontological argument was formulated by, for ten points, what saint who served as the Archbishop of Canterbury in the late 11th century?	ANSWER: Saint Anselmof Canterbury
Min Chueh Chang helped Gregory Pincus create a product meant for this purpose.The Woman Rebel was written by an activist supporting this action who was prosecuted under the Federal Comstock Law. Diaphragms were illegally smuggled into the United States to aid with this action, which was promoted by a Brownsville clinic that opened in 1916. Margaret Sanger and Planned Parenthood advocate for, for ten points, what type of medical care that assists in family planning and can prevent abortions?	ANSWER: contraception(acceptbirthcontrol; acceptfamilyplanningbefore mentioned; prompt on (women’s) medical care; do not accept or prompt on abortion)
This  man  deposed  Alakeshwara  of  the  Kotte  Kingdom  during  a  military  expedition  to  Ceylon.  He helped oversee the construction of the Porcelain Tower after he was reassigned as commander of Nanjing, after his influence waned under Hongxi [hong-shee]. This man’s most famous feats were performed under the Yongle Emperor, to whose court he brought a Malindi giraffe. For ten points, name this admiral of the Ming Dynasty known for his seven “treasure voyages.”	ANSWER: ZhengHe ([junghuh], but be lenient) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 8
This  man  heavily  used  the  theme  “Ashokan  Farewell”  in  one  of  his  works.  This  man  focused  on people like Everett Alvarez, Ambassador Bui Diem, and Tim O’Brien in a ten episode work that features his trademark style of slowly zooming away from a still image. Mathew Brady’s photographs and David McCulloch’s narration were praised in a 1990 work by, for ten points, what director ofThe Vietnam War, The Civil War, and several other documentary miniseries for television?	ANSWER: Ken Burns
This  leader’s  reputation  suffered  after  being  ambushed  by  Charles  “No  Flint”  Grey  in  the  Paoli Massacre, but he regained his prestige by leading a daring nighttime raid at the Battle of Stony Point. In this man’s most famous victory, he defeated the forces of the Western Confederacy and Blue Jacket, after which the Treaty of Greenville was signed. This man was sent by George Washington to subdue Native Americans in the Northwest Territory. For ten points, name this winner of the Battle of Fallen Timbers a Revolutionary-era brigadier general nicknamed “Mad Anthony.”	ANSWER: “Mad” Anthony Wayne
The  name  of  this  state  was  inspired  by  the  name  of  an  island  in  a  book  by  Garci  Rodriguez  de Montalvo. After landing near this state’s Point Reyes, an explorer gave the name “New Albion” to a region in this state. The Chumash were taken to pueblos to be taught Christianity after being transported from its  Channel  Islands.  Vizcaino  named  several  major  cities  in  this  state,  including  Monterey.  El  Camino Real passes between 21 missions in, for ten points, what western US state that underwent the Bear Flag Revolt?	ANSWER:California
This battle was preceded by a failed peace negotiation at the castle Montebello and the losing side’s failure to make new allies at Ciavenna. Wichmann of Magdeburg reinforced one side at Como prior to this battle. Guido da Landriano led a courageous defense of the cross of Aribert of Milan in this battle with the aid of the “Company of Death.” It led to the Treaty of Constance, where the Holy Roman Empire agreed  not  to  interfere  in  Italian  affairs.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1176  battle  in  which  the  Lombard League defeated Frederick Barbarossa.	ANSWER: Battle of Legnano
During this man’s administration, Jay Mazur chanted “We are one” at a rally in Columbus Park during the largest-ever strike in New York’s Chinatown. This man described another strike, involving an organization led by Robert Poli, as “a peril to national safety” and gave Poli’s group 48 hours to return to their jobs. PATCO was de-certified after striking under this president, who argued the strike was illegal. For ten points, name this president who clashed with the air traffic controller union in the 1980s.	ANSWER: RonaldReagan Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 8
This man was forced to begin his most famous campaign after his compatriots launched a drunken raid on settlements by the Salmon River. This leader was able to escape the clutches of Samuel Sturgis at  the  Battle  of  Canyon  Creek,  even  though  he  was  betrayed  by  the  Crow  tribe.  After  Oliver  Howard captured  this  man  at  the  Battle  of  Bear  Paw  Mountain,  this  leader  said  that  he  “will  fight  no  more forever.” For ten points, name this chief of the Nez Perce who attempted to lead his tribe to Canada.	ANSWER: Chief Joseph
This treaty was the target of the bullZelo Domus Dei, in which Pope Innocent X declared it “empty of meaning and effect for all time.” This treaty guaranteed free navigation on the Rhine and reaffirmed the principle ofcuius regio, eius religiolaid out in the Peace of Augsburg. The Eighty Years’ War was ended as a result of this treaty, which combined negotiations at Osnabruck and Munster. For ten points, name this peace treaty that ended the Thirty Years War.	ANSWER: Peace of Westphalia
This philosopher rejected that humans have a real notion of self in formulating his “bundle theory.” This thinker, who wrote a massively successfulHistory of England, originated a problem sometimes called his “guillotine,” the Is-Ought problem. This author of “Of Miracles” divided statements into “relations of ideas” and “matters of fact.” A “missing shade of blue” was imagined by, for ten points, what Scottish philosopher who wroteAn Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding?	ANSWER: David Hume
This man’s most famous endeavor was thwarted by Executive Order 1111, which placed his officers under federal control. After this man refused to listen to Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach, he was confronted by Henry Graham when John F. Kennedy called up the National Guard. This man opposed James  Hood  and  Vivian  Malone  at  the  Foster  Auditorium  after  declaring  his  support  for  “segregation forever.” For ten points, name this governor of Alabama who made the “stand in the schoolhouse door” in 1963.	ANSWER: George Wallace
A  German  territory  in  what  is  now  this  country  was  governed  by  Ambrosius  Ehinger,  who  was employed by the Welser banking family. The British Legions under Miguel de la Torre lost to Jose Antonio Paez,  who  led  this  nation’s  forces  at  the  Battle  of  Carabobo.  Simon  Bolivar’s  Decree  of  War  to  the Death primarily pertained to this country. For ten points, name this South American country that gained independence after the Battle of Lake Maracaibo.	ANSWER: Venezuela Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
This piece in C minor, which opens with a dominant seventh chord followed by loud descending runs of  sixteenth  notes,  was  dedicated to  “his  friend  Franz  Liszt.”  The  event  that  inspired  this  work  caused its composer to lament “All this has caused me much pain. Who could have forseen it?”; that event, the failing of the 1831 November Uprising, crushed hopes for freedom in its composer’s native Poland. For ten points, name this work for solo piano, an etude [ay-tood] by Frederic Chopin[sho-pan].	ANSWER:RevolutionaryEtude (orEtudeontheBombardmentofWarsaw; acceptEtudeOpus 10,Number12)
At the 1205 Battle of Adrianople, this man led a force that joined Baldwin the I of the Latin Empire to fight Tsar Kaloyan of the Bulgars. Michael Comnenus may have ordered the blinding of this man, and his  daughter  Anna  married  the  king  of  Serbia,  Stefan  Nemanjic.  This  man,  who  introduced  the  silver grosso  as  currency  in  Venice,  joined  crusaders  at  the  St.  Mark’s  Basilica.  Isaac  II  was  replaced  with Alexius Angelus in the Fourth Crusade by, for ten points, what blind Doge of Venice?	ANSWER: Enrico Dandolo
In  this  battle,  Everett  Peabody  lost  his  life  trying  to  hold  off  oncoming  Confederates  that  other Union commanders were unable to detect. Benjamin Prentiss was one of the Union commanders at this battle,  where  Don  Carlos  Buell  separated  his  Army  of  the  Ohio  into  four  divisions.  P.G.T.  Beauregard took command of the Confederate troops after Albert Sidney Johnston became the highest ranking officer to  die  in  the  Civil  War  in,  for  ten  points,  what  1862  battle  where  heavy  fighting  took  place  along  the Hornet’s Nest in Tennessee?	ANSWER: Battle ofShiloh
In this city, the Fortaleza do Monte overlooks the remains of a church whose facade was constructed by Japanese Christians under Carlo Spinola. Following a Dutch East India Company attack on this city in 1622, the Guia Fortress was built. The Bridge of Friendship is one of three bridges connecting parts of this city, where reclamation projects connected the islands of Coloane and Taipa. For ten points, name this special administrative region in the Pearl River Delta alongside Hong Kong, a city that was under Portuguese control until 1999.	ANSWER: Macau
Much of this state’s La Loma Park was damaged in a 1923 event that began in Wildcat Canyon. A  1990  disaster  began  in  this  state’s  Santa  Ynez  Mountains.  A  Maxine  Hong  Kingston  book  details the  effects  of  a  1991  firestorm  that  killed  at  least  25  people  in  this  state.  The  Santa  Ana  winds  have contributed to many natural disasters in this state, including the 1970 Laguna Fire in its south. For ten points, name this state where at least 80 people died in the 2018 Camp Fire.	ANSWER:California Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
Early versions of this device used rotating Nipkow disks. John Logie Baird pioneered the mechanical type of this device, which was improved upon by devices using image dissector tubes. Philo Farnsworth invented the electric version of this device, which contained cathode ray tubes that use superimposed red, green and blue to display color. For ten points, name this device whose early versions featured black and white broadcasts by NBC and CBS.	ANSWER: television(acceptTV)
This man rose to power with the support of the general Mucianus, who later encouraged this man to  implement  a  tax  on  urinals.  This  ruler  sent  Agricola  to  govern  Britain  and  extend  Roman  rule  into Caledonia. This ruler was campaigning in Jerusalem when he learned of Vitellius’ ambitions to become emperor, prompting this man to return to Rome and end the Year of the Four Emperors. For ten points, name this man who founded the Flavian dynasty after the death of Nero.	ANSWER: Vespasian(or  Titus  Flavius  CaesarVespasianus  Augustus,  but  do  not  prompt  on  Titus, Flavius, Caesar, or Augustus alone)
In this state, John Cruger fought against Nathaniel Greene and Thaddeus Kosciuszko at the Siege of 96. Alexander Stewart led a 1781 British victory along the Santee River in this state. Banastre Tarleton was defeated by a double envelopment by Daniel Morgan at this state’s Battle of Cowpens. During the Revolutionary  War,  Charles  Cornwallis  inflicted  a  defeat  on  Horatio  Gates  at  the  Battle  of  Camden  in this  state.  For  ten  points,  name  this  state  where,  in  1780,  American  forces  surrendered  in  the  Siege  of Charleston.	ANSWER: SouthCarolina
These sites were sustained by crops harvested by “neophytes.” The establishment of these sites forced nearby inhabitants into lands called reductions, where they would continue to live when these sites were divided into the rancho system. Defended by royal forts called presidios, 21 of these sites were linked by El  Camino  Real [ree-all].  Junipero  Serra  supervised  conversion  efforts  at,  for  ten  points,  what  Spanish religious outposts in California?	ANSWER: Spanish missions in California
George H.W. Bush gave this Cabinet position to Elizabeth Dole, which she left in 1990 to become president of the American Red Cross. Current Secretary of Transportation Elaine Chao held this position for all eight years of George W. Bush’s presidency. The first female cabinet member held this post for the entirety of FDR’s time in office. For ten points, name this cabinet position held by Frances Perkins, who oversaw the passage of laws governing overtime wages.	ANSWER: Secretary of Labor Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
This country commemorates a deadly 1952 student protest on Language Movement Day. A university in this country was attacked by tanks to flush out Chhatra League leaders in 1971. Yahya Khan launched Operation  Searchlight  to  suppress  the  independence-seeking  Awami  League  in  this  country,  which  was known at the time as East Pakistan. For ten points, name this country that, after gaining its independence from Pakistan in 1971, established its capital at Dhaka.	ANSWER: Bangladesh(prompt on East Pakistan before mentioned)
This composer wrote the score to a film about a nonexistent soldier during the reign of Paul I, as well as the music for an Eisenstein historical epic,Ivan  the  Terrible, whose Part II was suppressed by Stalin. This composer ofLieutenant  Kij ́e[kee-zhay] wrote a piece for narrator and orchestra in which the title boy’s grandfather is played by a bassoon and in which a canine swallows a duck whole. For ten points, name this Soviet composer ofPeter and the Wolf.	ANSWER: SergeiProkofiev
One philosopher from this school claimed that human mysticism was a particularly ineffable quality; that  work  used  the  example  of  George  Fox  and  the  Quakers  to  argue  that  the  origins  of  a  religion  did not reflect its value. The author ofVarieties  of  Religious  Experiencebelonged to this school of thought, whose  namesake  maxim  argued  that  the  “practical  effects”  of  your  conception  were  critical  to  rational thought. Charles Sanders Peirce [”purse”] and William James helped found, for ten points, what American philosophical school?	ANSWER:pragmatism(accept word forms)
This man commanded theAgamemnonand, later, theCaptainunder John Jervis in the Mediterranean fleet. An injury this man suffered at the Battle of Calvi left him blind in one eye; years later, this man claimed he didn’t see a signal to retreat after raising his telescope to that eye. A 169 foot tall Corinthian column in central London commemorates this man’s most famous battle, in which he was killed aboard theVictory. For ten points, name this British admiral who won the Battle of Trafalgar.	ANSWER: Horatio (Lord) Nelson
This  man  confused  the  Lachine[la-sheen]  Rapids  as  the  Northwest  Passage  to  China.  This  man brought Chief Donnacona with him on a return voyage to describe the riches of the northern Kingdom of Saguenay. This explorer was the first to describe the land that Iroquois inhabitants lived in as “Canada.” For ten points, name this Frenchman who discovered the mouth of the St. Lawrence River and mapped settlements at Quebec City and Montreal.	ANSWER: JacquesCartier Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
A duchy of this name was ruled by a monarch nicknamed “Longsword” and founded by his father, Rollo. A woman named Emma hailed from this region and married Ethelred the Unready. A duke of this region wed Matilda of Flanders and launched an invasion that culminated in the 1066 Battle of Hastings and  conquest  of  Anglo-Saxon  England.  For  ten  points,  name  this  region  of  north  France,  the  home  of William the Conqueror.	ANSWER: Normandy
In 2006, an athlete in this sport professed the “whiskey defense” to explain his positive urine test, which was made public four days after he beat Oscar Pereiro to win this sport’s premiere event. Another athlete  in  this  sport  founded  the  Livestrong  Foundation  after  surviving  testicular  cancer  and  won  this sport’s  annual  three-week-long  race  through  Western  Europe  seven  times.  Floyd  Landis  and  Lance Armstrong disgraced, for ten points, what sport’s Tour de France road race?	ANSWER: bi cycleracing (accept word forms)
The Mount Fortress was built to protect members of this religion.Fumi-ewere pictures that members of this religion stepped on to prove innocence. Twenty-six members of this religion were executed after their  protection  was  revoked  by  the  Shimazu  clan.  “Hidden”  members  of  this  religion  revolted  in  the Shimabara Rebellion. This religion was banned by sakoku law in Japan. For ten points, name this religion that was spread to Qing China by Jesuit missionaries.	ANSWER: Roman Catholicism (prompt on Christianity)
At one battle in this location, General Hemu lost his eye to an arrow, leading to his defeat by Bairam Khan and a 13-year old Akbar. Ahmad Shah and the Durrani Empire won a later battle at this location. Another  victory  at  this  site  led  to  the  fall  of  the  Dehli  Sultanate  under  Ibrahim  Lodi  and  the  rise  of Babur. For ten points, name this location of three prominent battles, in 1526, 1556, and 1761 in India, the first of which established the Mughal Empire.	ANSWER: Battle(s) of Panipat(prompt on India before mentioned)
This leader argued that “the prospect of domination of the nation’s scholars by Federal employment [...] is gravely to be regarded.” This man delivered a “message of leave-taking and farewell” that explained “American makers of plowshares could [...] make swords as well” and warned against the military-industrial complex. For ten points, name this 20th century President whose advice regarding the defense industry derived from his service as Allied Commander in World War II.	ANSWER: Dwight D. Eisenhower Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
A Syrian holder of this position took it at age 14, was plagued by numerous sex scandals, and was assassinated  at  age  18.  In  addition  to  Elagabalus,  an  earlier  holder  of  this  position  mocked  legislators by suggesting his horse Incitatus could serve as consul; that man was nicknamed “little boots” and was assassinated by the Praetorian Guard. For ten points, name this position held by madmen like Caligula.	ANSWER:EmperorofRome(prompt on partial answers, like “emperor” or “ruler of Rome;” do not accept king of Rome)
This  man  met  his  business  partner,  Phineas  Miller,  while  staying  at  the  Mulberry  Grove  estate  of Revolutionary War widow Catherine Greene. He received a government contract to produce ten thousand muskets in two years, during which he pioneered the use of replaceable parts in gun manufacturing. This man developed a machine that used a wire mesh to isolate seeds from the fibers of a crop widely grown in the American south. For ten points, name this inventor of the cotton gin.	ANSWER: Eli Whitney
One  of  these  objects  includes  an  unusually  gory  depiction  of  Jesus  in  the  center,  was  thought  to have healing powers, and was created for a hospital for lepers in Isenheim. Another one of these artworks includes a panel showing the Adoration of the Mystic Lamb and a triple-crowned Almighty figure; that example was created by the van Eyck brothers. For ten points, name these religious artworks created for the center of churches, including one in Ghent.	ANSWER: altarpieces  (accept  descriptions  like  “paintingsplaced  behind  analtar”;  prompt  on descriptions of panel paintings, including polyptychs)
This  political  faction  was  opposed  by  the  White  League  and  the  Red  Shirts,  paramilitary  groups that  supported  the  Redeemers.  This  faction  passed  legislation  that  created  five  districts,  each  ruled  by a  different  general.  Anticipating  the  dismissal  of  War  Secretary  Edwin  Stanton,  this  faction  passed  the Tenure of Office Act. Thaddeus Stevens led, for ten points, what Reconstruction-era political faction that tried to impeach Andrew Johnson?	ANSWER: RadicalRepublicans (prompt on Republicans)
This body of water, also known as Lago Cochibola, contains a namesake population of freshwater sharks. The first registered Spanish settlement in mainland North America, Granada, is on its shores. The Bryan-Chamorro Treaty gave the US rights to build a canal through this lake, a proposal recently revived by an Hong Kong consortium. For ten points, name this largest lake in Central America, connected by the Tipitapa River to Lake Managua, found in a country also home to the Contras and Sandinistas.	ANSWER: Lake Nicaragua Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
In one battle fought in this state, British forces led by Charles Mawhood surrounded and killed Hugh Mercer after mistaking him for George Washington.  At another battle in this state, the actions of Mary Hays  may  have  inspired  popular  accounts  of  Molly  Pitcher.   The  Hessian  commander  Johann  Rall  was killed at another battle fought in this state in December 1776 that was preceded by Washington’s crossing of the Delaware.  For ten points, name this state home to the Revolutionary War battles of Princeton and Trenton.	ANSWER: NewJersey
One man involved in this event had previously fled to Paterborn and requested reinstatement from the subject of this event.  Empress Irene of Constantinople was de-legitimized after this event, and Einhard declared that its subject would “not have set foot” in St.  Peter’s Basilica had he known what would take place.  This event took place on Christmas Day, 800.  For ten points, name this ceremony in which Pope Leo III created the Holy Roman Empire by elevating the son of Pepin the Short to the throne.	ANSWER: CrowningofCharlemagne(acceptCoronationofCharlemagne)
This country’s current President led a 1983 coup against Shehu Shagari.  Abubakar Shekau leads a terrorist  organization  based  in  this  country,  which  in  2014  attacked  a  school  in  Chibok,  abducting  276 girls.  Muhammad Buhari replaced Goodluck Jonathan as this country’s President in 2015.  For ten points, name this African country where, in 2011, Boko Haram bombed a UN compound in Abuja.	ANSWER:Nigeria
One  man  involved  in  this  scandal  wrote  “We  want  more  friends  in  this  Congress.”  Aaron  Perry investigated this scandal, which was exposed by a letter from Henry McComb to theNew York Sun.  It involved Congressman Oakes Ames’ use of stock in a railroad company as bribes, and was revealed during the 1872 Presidential election.  For ten points,  name this scandal that ended Schuyler Colfax’s political career but failed to prevent Ulysses Grant’s re-election.	ANSWER: CreditMobilier(of America) scandal
This man was the first athlete to run for 2,000 yards in an NFL season in 1973.  He had to auction his 1968 Heisman Trophy, earned at USC, to pay the estate of Ronald Goldman as a result of a civil suit in  1997,  two  years  after  Alan  Dershowitz  and  Johnnie  Cochran  defended  this  man  in  the  “Trial  of  the Century”.  For ten points, name this former Buffalo Bill running back who was acquitted of murdering his ex-wife, Nicole Brown, in 1995.	ANSWER: Orenthal James “O.J.” Simpson Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 8
One  man  captured  during  this  event  was  given  the  option  to  kill  himself  but  refused,  leading  him to be shot by Michael Lippert.  Franz von Papen’s Marburg Speech heavily influenced this event, whose planners  called  it  Operation  Hummingbird.   This  event  led  to  the  death  of  George  Strasser  and  others who suppressed the 1923 Beer Hall Putsch.  Its main target was Ernst Rohm and it led to the rise of a force under Heinrich Himmler.  For ten points, name this purge of the SA by the Nazi Party.	ANSWER: NightoftheLongKnives(acceptOperationHummingbirdbefore it is read)
In  the  1800s,  Leslie  Keeley  discovered  that  a  mixture  of  sodium  and  this  element’s  chloride  was effective in treating addictions, including alcoholism.  Fritz Haber suggested a way to pay off German war reparations by collecting this element from seawater.  Geiger and Marsden disproved the plum pudding atomic  model  by  bombarding  alpha  particles  into  a  thin  foil  of  this  metal.   For  ten  points,  name  this precious metal with chemical symbol Au.	ANSWER:gold
This man’s doctoral thesis studied the degree of brain myelinization in white rats.  With Harvey Karr, this man conditioned rats to run into walls when food was moved from its previous location in a maze. This  engineer  of  the  Kerplunk!   experiment  supposedly  invented  the  coffee  break  in  an  ad  campaign. With  Rosalie  Rayner,  he  conditioned  a  nine-month  old  boy  to  fear  furry  objects  in  the  “Little  Albert” experiment.  For ten points, name this American psychologist who founded the school of behaviorism.	ANSWER: John Broadus Watson
Folk singer Dave van Ronk was arrested during this event.  The Mattachine Society tried to control rioting after this event.  Allen Ginsberg said that some protesters during this event had “lost that wounded look”.  The death of Judy Garland has been proposed as a starting point for this event.  An NYPD raid on a bar triggered, for ten points, what series of riots in Greenwich Village in 1969 that began the modern gay rights movement?	ANSWER: Stonewall(Inn) riots (or the raid on theStonewallInn itself)
In  1569,  Francis  Xavier’s  men negotiated  the  use of  this  city as  a  Portuguese  port,  and it  briefly became  a  Jesuit  colony  during  the  late  Sengoku  period.   TheBockscarflew  to  this  city  after  leaving cloud-obscured Kokura, where it released a plutonium bomb called the “Fat Man”.  For ten points, name this Japanese city, the second target of a U.S. atomic bomb after Hiroshima.	ANSWER:Nagasaki
In her twenties, this chemistry teacher worked at Chicago’s Hull House, before attending  the  Wharton  School.  As  head  of  the  National  Consumers'  League,  this  woman witnessed   the   Triangle   Shirtwaist   Factory   Fire,   leading   to   her appointment   to   the Committee of Safety. With a first lady, this woman organized the She-She-She camps in her highest office. For ten points, name this first female cabinet member, the Secretary of Labor under Franklin D. Roosevelt.	ANSWER: Frances Perkins (or Fannie Coralie Perkins)
This  proposal  came  out  of  a  series  of  meetings  with  several  Barnburners  like Preston   King   and   Hannibal   Hamlin.   Voting   on   this   proposal   immediately   followed   a proposal  by  Indiana  Democrat  William  A.  Wick  to  simply  extend  the line  of  the  Missouri Compromise.  Attached  as  a  rider  to  a  two  million  dollar  appropriations  bill  to  end  the Mexican-American  War,  for  ten  points,  what  was  this  unsuccessful  1846  proposal  by  a Pennsylvania Democrat to ban slavery in the newly won territories?	ANSWER: Wilmot Proviso
Michael  VIII  [[the  eighth]]  signed  the  Treaty  of  Nymphaeum  [[nim-FAY-um]]  with this  polity,  allowing  trade  concessions  within  the  Byzantine  Empire  in  exchange  for  fifty ships  to  push  his  claim  to  the  throne.  A  Mongol  siege  of this  state's  port  of  Kaffa  is hypothesized  to  be  the  origin  of  the  Black  Death  in  Europe.  The  1768  Treaty  of  Versailles forced this Ligurian republic to cede Corsica to the Kingdom of France. For ten points, name this  Northwestern  Italian  republic  which  fought  many  wars  with  the  rival  trade  empire  of Venice.	ANSWER: The Most Serene Republic of Genoa (accept Serenìscima Repùbrica de Zêna; or Repubblica di Genova; or Res Publica Ianuensis; also accept the Common Companions of Genoa; or Compagna Communis Ianuensis)
The  Kit  Carson  scouts  were  former  members  of  this  organization  who  defected  to the  United  States.  Backed  by  the  People's  Army,  this  force  killed  3,000  pro-American citizens  in  Hue  [[WAY]]  during  the  Tet  Offensive.  A  northern  country  supplied  armaments to  this  organization  via  the  Ho  Chi  Minh  Trail.  A  prolonged  guerilla  war  against  U.S.  forces was  fought  by,  for  ten  points,  what  communist  paramilitary  group  during  a  mid-20th century war?	ANSWER: Viet Cong (accept National Liberation Front of South Vietnam; or Mặt trận Dân tộc Giải phóng Miền Nam Việt Nam)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 8
This  general  allied  with  Benito  Juarez  to  battle  the  forces  of  Emperor  Maximilian, eventually  deposing  and  succeeding  Sebastian  Lerdo  in  his  highest  office.  Factional  strife between  General  Bernardo  Reyes  and  the cientificos boiled  over  when  this  man  declared himself  winner  of  the  presidency  for  the  eighth  time,  after  which  he  was  the  target  of  an uprising  by  Francisco  Madero.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Mexican  president  immediately prior to the Mexican Revolution.	ANSWER: Porfirio Díaz (or José de la Cruz Porfirio Díaz Mori)
Pausanias [[pow-SAN-ee-uss]] reported that the polis of Thebes claimed to have the bones  of  this  hero.  Roland's  legendary  sword  Durendal  was  first  forged  for  this  man. Neoptolemus  [[nee-op-TAH-leh-muss]]  supposedly  killed  this  man's  infant  son,  Astyanax, by  throwing  him  from  the  walls  of  a  citadel.  This  man  slew  Patroclus  while  wearing  the armor  of  his  shield-brother.  Achilles  dragged  the  corpse  of,  for  ten  points,  which  Trojan hero and son of Priam?	ANSWER: Hector
This  man  ironically  published  his  memoir, Permanent  Record,  on  September  17th which is also Constitution Day. This man is currently the head of the Board of Directors for the  Freedom  of  the  Press  Foundation, having  served  in  that  role  since  2016.  In  2020,  this man  was  finally  granted asylum  by  the  Russian  government  after  fleeing  the  United  States in  2013.  For  ten  points,  name  this  former  NSA  worker  who  leaked  classified  information about mass surveillance.	ANSWER: Edward Snowden (or Edward Joseph Snowden)
Near  this  city,  ancient  Greeks  founded  a  settlement  named  Hesperis  [[heh-SPEH- riss]]  in  the  sixth  century  BC.  This  city  thrived  as  a  center  of  the  Roman  province  of Cyrenaica [[sy-ruh-NAY-kah]]. After Italy granted independence to its North African colony, Tripoli and this city served as the Kingdom of Libya’s two capitals. For ten points, name this Libyan  city  where  Islamist  militants  attacked  a  U.S.  diplomatic  compound  and  killed  four Americans, including Ambassador Chris Stevens.	ANSWER: Benghazi [[ben-GAH-zee]]
Isaac  Newton  theorized  this  substance  was  composed  of  corpuscles  in  his  book Opticks. That particle theory of polarization of this substance was mainstream until Robert Hooke developed the "pulse theory" and compared this form of radiation to waves of water in  his  book Micrographia.  Years  later,  Max  Planck  [[PLAHNK]]  described  this  type  of radiation  as  a  wave  that can  gain  or  lose  finite  amounts  of  energy,  known  as  "quanta."  For ten points, name this type of electromagnetic radiation that can be seen by human eyes.	ANSWER: Visible Light  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 8
The name of this location in the Canaima [[kah-NAY-muh]] National Park is derived from  the  American  aviator  who  first  surveyed  it  from  an  airplane.  In  2009,  Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez argued for reinstating this geographical feature’s indigenous name, Kerepakupai  Merú [[keh-reh-pah-KOO-pye   meh-ROO]],  which  means  “waterfall  of  the deepest place.” For ten points, name this world’s tallest uninterrupted waterfall  which measures 3,212 feet.	ANSWER: Angel Falls(or Salto Ángel [[AHN-hel]], or Kerepakupai Merú [[keh-reh-PAH- koo-pye MEH-roo]] before mentioned)   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 8
The heresy of Adoptionism was created by this city’s archbishop Elipandus. In one legend, this city’s Alcazar fortress refused to surrender, even after Jose Moscardo’s son was taken for ransom. This European city produced swords used by both Hannibal’s Carthaginians and the Roman legions; those swords were made of a steel alloy that was unmatched until the discovery of Damascus steel in the Middle Ages. For ten points, name this city in central Spain that was once called the “Imperial City” as the seat of Charles V’s court.	ANSWER: Toledo
According  to  several  European  folklore  traditions,  the  fossilized  remains  of  belemnoids  are  formed by  this  phenomena.  In  Japanese  mythology,  a  white  skinned  kami  uses  taiko  drums  to  control  this phenomenon. The power of this phenomenon and the durability of diamond are embodied by the vajra, a ritual weapon wielded by another god who is praised in the ancient hymns of theRigvedafor slaying Vritra. Raijin and Indra are gods of, for ten points, what meteorological phenomenon that is wielded as a weapon by Zeus?	ANSWER: lightningbolts (acceptthunderbolts; prompt on “thunder” or “storm”; do not prompt on rain)
This city’s government lost the Supreme Court caseRicci v. DeStefanoagainst a group of firefighters who were not promoted despite passing qualification tests. In this city, James Hillhouse established the first  public  tree  planting  project  in  America,  leading  it  to  be  nicknamed  “The  Elm  City.”  This  city was  the  birthplace  of  a  group  known  as  “Order  322”  or  “Skull  and  Bones,”  whose  collegiate  members included John Kerry and George W. Bush. For ten points, name this Connecticut city that is home to Yale University.	ANSWER: NewHaven
This ship was sent to patrol the Burdwood Bank on what would be its final mission. This ship was formally  commissioned  as  the  USSPhoenix,  but  was  eventually  sold  off  for  the  People’s  Loyalty  Day celebration. After this ship was sunk,The Sunpublished an infamous headline that read “Our lads sink gunboat and hole cruiser.” The “Gotcha!” headline trumpeted the sinking of this ship, the first ever to be sunk by a nuclear submarine. A general who fought for Argentine independence names, for ten points, what ship that was sunk during the Falklands War?	ANSWER: ARA GeneralBelgrano
An 1887 experiment involving a block of sandstone floating in mercury failed to find the fringe shift expected by a “wind” generated by this substance. This substance is supposed to be dragged by the Earth moving through it, a process not detected by the Michelson-Morley experiment. The theory of relativity was able to explain the non-existence of, for ten points, what hypothetical substance through which light moves, according to a theory that was finally debunked in the early 20th century?	ANSWER: luminiferous aether Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
This  battle  began  despite  the  peacemaking  efforts  of  Marcus  Ambustus;  negotiations  broke  down when one side began to fight with Clusium. This battle’s result forced the losing side to recall Camillus from  exile  in  Veii  and  appoint  him  dictator;  Camillus  eventually  returned  and  forced  the  Senones  back from the Capitoline Hill. The winning commander in this battle allegedly threw his sword on a scale after demanding 1,000 pounds of gold to be paid as ransom, declaring “woe to the vanquished.” For ten points, name this 390 BC battle that allowed Brennus to sack Rome.	ANSWER: Battle of the AlliaRiver
An opera titled for one of these people ends with a chorus singing “Glory, Glory to you.” One of these people falls in love with Marfa in a Rimski-Korsakov opera titled for one of these people’sBride. The hero Susanin leads Poles into a blizzard in a Mikhail Glinka opera titledA Life forone of these people. The song  “flow,  flow  bitter  tears”  ends  a  Modest  Mussorgsky  opera  in  which  one  of  these  leaders  gives  the throne to his son Fyodor. Boris Godunov held, for ten points, what position that was abolished with the fall of the Romanovs?	ANSWER: tsarof Russia (orczarof Russia; prompt on partial answers, including “emperor of Russia”)
A settlement known as Keshet was created on the grounds where this region’s primary city of Quneitra had been burned to the ground. The southern portion of Mount Hermon extends into this region, where the Purple Line was created after a ceasefire during the 1973 Yom Kippur War. In the aftermath of a 1967 war, over 100,000 refugees fled this region. For ten points, name this plateau region of the Levant that Israel captured from Syria during the Six Day War.	ANSWER:GolanHeights
This man was lampooned as an “anti-poverty czar” by Jack Anderson while Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity under Nixon. This man replaced James Schlesinger after the Halloween Massacre, becoming the youngest Secretary of Defense in U.S. history. This man’s visit with Saddam Hussein during the Reagan administration came under scrutiny during his later second term as Defense Secretary, when he oversaw the Abu Ghraib prison complex. For ten points, name this Secretary of Defense under George W. Bush who oversaw the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.	ANSWER: Donald Rumsfeld
The Body of Liberties was established as  a legal code  for this colony, which was bounded by the “Old  Colony  Line.”  Midwife  Margaret  Jones  was  hanged  in  this  colony  after  her  patients  got  sicker. John  Cotton  was  an  early  settler  in  this  colony,  the  first  American  colony  to  legalize  slavery.  During the Antinomian Controversy, Anne Hutchinson was banished from this colony. Governor John Winthrop delivered the “City upon a hill” sermon in, for ten points, what English colony founded by Puritans that was centered on Salem and Boston?	ANSWER:MassachusettsBayColony (prompt on Massachusetts) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
This battle featured  fierce fighting over the village  of Ponyri,  which gave one side  the opportunity to  launch  Operation  Kutuzov.  Walther  Model  and  Erich  von  Manstein  aimed  to  pincer  the  namesake salient during this battle. Codenamed Citadel, this battle was delayed so that one side could wait for more Panthers. Tigers and T-34s clashed at Prokhorovka in, for ten points, what 1943 battle on the Eastern Front, the largest tank battle in history?	ANSWER: Battle of Kursk
Note:  two  answers  required.  At  an  embassy  owned  by  one  of  these  countries  in  the  other  country, an  indoor  soccer  game  was  interrupted  by  commandos  setting  off  a  bomb  under  the  floor,  beginning Operation Chavin de Huantar. That raid ended a hostage crisis that began on the 63rd birthday of the emperor of one of these two countries; the hostages were taken by members of the Tupac Amaru terrorist group, which was based in the other country. A corrupt politician who was the first man of Asian descent to become President of a non-Asian country is a citizen of these two countries. For ten points, name this pair of countries that fought an extradition battle over Alberto Fujimori.	ANSWER: JapanandPeru(accept in either order)
Thomas  Merton wrote “The  Seven-Story  Mountain” about his  life in  one of  these places.  The site of  the  burning  bush  is  supposedly  located  at  one  of  these  places  on  the  Sinai  Peninsula  in  Egypt.  The most  important  Orthodox  examples  of  these  places  are  located  on  Mt.  Athos  in  Greece.  In  the  1530s, Henry VIII closed many of these places down in the “Dissolution” of them. For ten points, name these institutions where religious devotees live in a community, including monks and nuns.	ANSWER: monastery(do not accept church, cathedral, etc.)
While surveying the grounds for this project, its architect crushed his foot when it was trapped by a passing ferry, resulting in a tetanus infection that killed him. A physician involved in the creation of this project named Andrew Smith coined the name of a sickness that afflicted many of the workers along it, “caisson  disease.”  This  project  began  in  1869  and  was  opened  in  1883  as  Chester  Arthur  walked  along it. Washington Roebling oversaw the creation of, for ten points, what bridge connecting Manhattan to a namesake New York borough?	ANSWER: BrooklynBridge
The majority opinion in this case citesPugsley v. Sellmeyerwhen noting that it “does not relate to regulation of the length of skirts or the type of clothing.” Abe Fortas delivered the majority opinion in this case, which argued that “the petitioners were quiet and passive.” This case arose out of demonstrations in support of the Christmas Truce. This case’s namesake test has been used to see if school policies violate constitutional rights. For ten points, name this 1969 case about a ban on the wearing of black armbands to protest the Vietnam War.	ANSWER: Tinkerv. Des Moines Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
This man was accused of having “undertaken to be the hero of the night” among a group described as a “motley rabble of saucy boys.” This man, who is buried in the Old Granary Burying Ground, was once thought to have been a slave of William Brown. A protest against the Townshend Acts ended with the death of this man, followed by four other deaths; their killers were defended by John Adams. For ten points, name this black man who was the first to die in the Boston Massacre.	ANSWER: Crispus Attucks
Following  a  2006  war,  “The  Right  of  Peace”  advocated  for  residents  of  this  territory  to  live  in one  neighboring  country  while  holding  citizenship  in  another.  The  Mukataa  of  a  political  leader  of  this territory  was  once  found  in  its  capital  city  of  Ramallah  until  it  was  raided  by  the  IDF  in  2002.  The founder of Fatah, Yasser Arafat, administered his main organization from this territory, which is named for its position relative to the Jordan River. For ten points, name this territory that makes up the State of Palestine along with the Gaza Strip.	ANSWER: WestBank(prompt on Palestine before mentioned)
After serving as a Confederate soldier at the Battle of Shiloh, this man joined the Union Army at the behest of James Mulligan. When this man heard that an officer in his “Rear Guard” handed over a girl to be eaten by cannibals, he attempted to place the blame on trader Tippu Tip; that incident occurred while he led an expedition to relieve Emin Pasha. In 1869, this man was sent to relieve a Scottish missionary who was searching for the source of the Nile. For ten points, name this explorer who legendarily asked “Dr. Livingstone, I presume?”	ANSWER: Henry MortonStanley
In  1998,  the  National  Film  Registry  preserved  a  film  of  this  event  created  by  camera  shop  owner Barley Elliot. Gig Harbor was one of the endpoints of the central structure involved in this event, which was designed by Leon Moisseiff. A dog named Tubby perished in this event, in which 40 mile an hour winds caused an irregular torsional vibrational mode that led the central structure to flap. For ten points, name this disaster along a structure nicknamed “Galloping Gertie” crossing the Puget Sound in Washington.	ANSWER: collapse(orfailure,  etc.)  of  theTacomaNarrowsBridge  (acceptGallopingGertiein place of Tacoma Narrows Bridge before “Galloping” is read)
In one of this author’s novels, Urania Cabral lives under the Trujillo dictatorship in the Dominican Republic. This author, who fictionalized his time at a military academy inThe Time of The Hero, created the character of Pedro Camacho, who works for Radio Panamericano during the 1950s. For ten points, name this winner of the 2010 Nobel Prize in Literature, a Peruvian author who wroteAunt Julia and the Scriptwriter.	ANSWER: MarioVargasLlosa(prompt on Vargas or Llosa alone) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
One of these people, who authored a manual of their grammar called theRazos, was Raimon Vidal. Another of these people is the subject of Robert Browning’s poemSordello. William IX, Duke of Aquitaine is  often  called  the  first  of  these  people,  whose  primary  output  consisted  of  cansos  and  sirventes  and who often used the Occitan language to tell stories about chivalrous themes. For ten points, name these medieval European poets who wrote songs of courtly love.	ANSWER: troubadours (prompt on musician and/or poet until “poet” is read)
This program was criticized for a slow reaction to the Church Rock mill disaster in 1979. This program began  after  schools  on  93rd  and  99th  Street  were  harmed  by  Hooker  Company’s  poor  management  of a landfill in Niagara Falls, New York, leading numerous schoolchildren to be poisoned. Love Canal, the Valley  of  the  Drums,  and  other  locations  are  judged  in  the  Hazard  Ranking  System  by,  for  ten  points, what federal program that empowers the EPA to clean up hazardous waste sites?	ANSWER: Superfund(prompt  on  the  EPA  or  Environmental  Protection  Agency  before  mentioned; prompt on CERCLA or the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act)
This city fell under the rule of the patron Ottone’s[oh-toh-nay’s] family after he won the Battle of Desio  against  Napo  della  Torre.  Twelve  “captains  and  defenders  of  liberty”  were  elected  to  write  this city’s laws when it was briefly reorganized into the Golden Ambrosian Republic following the fall of the Visconti  family.  After  that  republic  fell,  this  city  was  ruled  by  the  Sforzas.  For  ten  points,  name  this capital of Lombardy, a city in Northern Italy.	ANSWER: Milan
An  organization  advocating  this  political  ideology  established  its  headquarters  at  Murphy  Ranch under the leadership of William Dudley Pelley. Smedley Butler claimed that a conspiracy advocating this political ideology launched the Business Plot. The Silver Legion espoused this political ideology, sympathy for which was partially responsible for the cancellation of Father Coughlin’s radio show. For ten points, name this nationalist ideology held by American sympathizers of Germany and Italy in 1940.	ANSWER: fascism(accept  word  forms,  likefascist;  prompt  on  nationalist  before  mentioned;  do  not accept or prompt on Nazism)
An opera about people working in this profession opens with a corrected quote from the Smyth Report and  features  the  central  character  singing  the  aria  “Batter  my  Heart,  three  person’d  God.”  Another opera titled for one of these people includes scenes entitled “Train,” “Bed,” and “Spaceship,” as well as interludes known as “knee plays” over the course of its five-hour run time. A John Adams opera set at Los Alamos depicts, for ten points, what profession depicted inDoctor Atomicand Philip Glass’sEinstein on the Beach?	ANSWER: scientists (accept specific types of scientists, such as nuclearphysicists) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
A ruler of this country had, in his earlier military career, led a fleet against Alfredo Acton that tried to break the Otranto Barrage. This country, which faced the 1918 Aster Revolution, was the site of a very short-lived Soviet Republic led by Bela Kun. During World War II, Miklos Horthy was a regent of, for ten points, what European country that was ruled by the medieval Arpad dynasty and, until World War I, part of a dual monarchy with Austria?	ANSWER: Kingdom of Hungary(prompt on Austria-Hungary before “Miklos” is mentioned)
One  of  the  leaders  of  this  political  movement  introduced  the  Joint  Committee  of  Fifteen,  whose members  included  John  Bingham  and  chair  William  Fessenden.  This  movement,  which  was  heavily criticized by the Dunning School, lobbied for passage of the Wade-Davis Bill and worked with “Scalawags” to expand their influence. Horace Greeley and Thaddeus Stevens led, for ten points, what faction of the Republican Party that advocated for civil rights and emancipation during Reconstruction, as opposed to more moderate politicians?	ANSWER: RadicalRepublicans (prompt on partial answers; acceptRadicals alone after “Republican” is mentioned)
This  man  stored  the  remains  of  his  long-time  ally,  Rwandan  President  Juvenal  Habyarimana,  at his palace in Gbadolite, this politician’s so-called “Versailles of the Jungle.” This leader deposed Patrice Lumumba  and  was  deposed  himself  by  Laurent  Kabila  in  1997.  This  leader  changed  his  own  name  to establish  pro-Africa  cultural  awareness  and  changed  the  name  of  his  country  to  Zaire.  For  ten  points, name this leopard print hat-wearing dictator who ruled in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.	ANSWER: Joseph D ́esir ́e Mobutu(orMobutuSese Seko Kuku Ngbendu Wa Za Banga)
The  inventor  of  this  technique  worked  at  the  Cetus  Corporation  and  was  lambasted  in  a  2007 New  York  Timesarticle  for  believing  in  astrology,  denying  AIDS,  and  calling  climate  change  a  hoax. This technique greatly improved following the discovery of an enzyme capable of staying stable at high temperatures  known  as  Taq [”tak”].  This  technique  allowed  for  the  development  of  DNA  testing  by criminal investigators. Kary Mullis invented, for ten points, what laboratory technique that can amplify a sample of DNA?	ANSWER:polymerasechainreaction(orPCR)
In May 2015, this country became the first to pass a referendum legalizing same-sex marriage, and it  is  considering  another  referendum  to  repeal  the  abortion-forbidding  Article  9  of  its  constitution.  Leo Varadkar’s elevation as leader of this country made him the first biracial leader of a European country, and the first LGBT person to hold the title of Taoiseach[tee-shuck]. For ten points, name this country where Varadkar leads Fine Gael[finn-nehGALE], the rival party to Fianna F ́ail[fee-uh-nuhFOIL] and Sinn F ́ein[shinFAYN] in Dublin.	ANSWER: Republic ofIreland(do not accept Northern Ireland) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
An attempt to dissolve this alliance ended at Rotebro when king Hans captured the peasant leader Sten Sture the Elder. This alliance was weakened when the Engelbrekt Rebellion managed to unseat Erik of Pomerania in favor of Christopher of Bavaria. The 1523 coronation of Gustav I Vasa marked the end of this alliance, which was constructed by Margaret I and Haakon VII in order to challenge the Hanseatic League. For ten points, name this medieval union of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.	ANSWER: KalmarUnion (or the Union ofKalmaris)
This  composer  depicted  Pontus  de  la  Gardie’s  march  on  Kaksialmi  in  one  work.  His  seventh  and final symphony is  a one-movement work in  C major. This  composer of  theKarelia Suitewrote  a piece often  performed  under  titles  like  “Impromptu”  or  “Scandinavian  Choral  March”  due  to  its  forbidden nationalist sentiment. This composer adapted stories from his national epic, the Kalevala, in works such as theLemminkainen Suite. For ten points, name this composer ofFinlandia.	ANSWER: Jean Sibelius
This  event  was  preceded  by  a  rally  at  Blue  Island,  where  anything  that  could  be  lit  on  fire  was. Richard Olney helped mitigate this event by obtaining an injunction barring labor leaders from joining it. Though Illinois governor John Peter Altgeld declined to intervene in it, Grover Cleveland sent Nelson Miles’ troops to break it up because it was disrupting federal mail. Eugene Debs was arrested for his role in, for ten points, what 1894 worker’s strike targeting a sleeping car manufacturer?	ANSWER: Pullmanstrike
This city’s skyline features two cranes, known as “Samson and Goliath,” in the shipyards of Harland and  Wolff.  Its  neighborhoods  of  Short  Strand  and  Cluan  Place  are  separated  by  a  “peace  line,”  as  are Falls Road and Shankill Road. TheRMS Titanicwas built in this city, which was home to a parliament at Stormont which was dissolved during the height of the Troubles. The Good Friday Agreement was signed in, for ten points, what city, the capital of Northern Ireland?	ANSWER: Belfast
This  leader  survived  a  failed  coup  attempt,  the  February  26  Incident,  which  ended  the  period  of “government  by  assassination.”  The  first  time  many  of  this  ruler’s  subjects  heard  his  voice  was  during the Jewel Voice Broadcast. After defeat at the Battle of Saipan, this man ordered his subjects to commit suicide  rather  than  be  captured.  Douglas  MacArthur  allowed  this  man  to  keep  his  position  during  the American post-war occupation. For ten points, name this emperor of Japan during World War II.	ANSWER: Emperor Hirohito(or theShowaEmperor) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
An  amendment  co-sponsored  by  this  Senator  and  Mark  Hatfield  brought  the  chamber  to  a  halt when this man accused each senator of sending 50,000 Americans to their premature deaths. This man co-chaired  a  commission  with  Donald  Fraser  that  led  to  a  surge  in  the  amount  and  importance  of presidential primaries. This man lost an election to an incumbent who promised “peace with honor” and claimed this man would settle for “peace at any price.” For ten points, name this anti-war South Dakotan Democrat who lost every state but Massachusetts to Richard Nixon in 1972.	ANSWER: George McGovern
Description acceptable. In one work, one individual with this role has to be replaced by Polus and then Callicles, all of whom argue that rhetoric is superior to philosophy. In another work, a person who performs  this  role  gives  a  hypothetical  argument  about  justice’s  origins  as  a  means  to  an  end.  That individual, Glaucon, takes on this role after Thrasymachus, another of these people, fails to convince a man that justice is the “interest of the stronger.” For ten points, identify this role, in which people served as sounding boards for a certain ancient Athenian philosopher.	ANSWER: interlocutorsofSocrates(accept  descriptive  answers  such  as  “peoplewhotalkto  (or arguewith, etc.)Socrates”)
An  unsuccessful  1970  fascist  coup  in  this  country  was  instigated  by  a  man  nicknamed  “The  Black Prince.”  This  country’s  communist  party  forged  a  mainstream  alliance  in  the  Historic  Compromise. Antonio  Negri  was  arrested,  then  released,  for  leading  the  Red  Brigades,  who  kidnapped  and  killed  a prime  minister  of  this  country  during  its  turbulent  Years  of  Lead.  For  ten  points,  name  this  European country that chose to become a republic in 1946 and was led by Aldo Moro.	ANSWER: Italy
In  1755,  this  city  was  struck  by  the  Cape  Ann  earthquake,  the  largest  earthquake  to  hit  the northeastern United States. This city’s namesake “Fruit Company” was a predecessor of the United Fruit Company in the 19th century. This city’s cultural elite were known as “Brahmins” and included the Lowell and Cabot families. John Adams gained fame for defending British soldiers accused of participating in a 1775 “Massacre” in, for ten points, what capital city of Massachusetts?	ANSWER: Boston
The Raiders came back to defeat this team in the 1968 “Heidi” Game, whose ending was cut off on television by a children’s movie. This team won its only Super Bowl by a score of 16 to 7 against Earl Morrall and Johnny Unitas after the quarterback guaranteed an upset victory. Joe Namath is the all-time leading passer for this team, the winner of Super Bowl 3 over the Baltimore Colts. For ten points, name this NFL team that shares the Meadowlands of New Jersey with the New York Giants.	ANSWER: New YorkJets(prompt on New York) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
This  man  helped  Metellus  Pius  quell  a  revolt  in  present-day  Spain  led  by  Quintus  Sertorius.   He gained power in any land within 50 miles of the Mediterranean Sea with the Lex Gabinia and later led the Optimates to a victory at the Battle of Dyrrhachium.  This man’s head was presented to Julius Caesar after he was executed under orders of Ptolemy XIII of Egypt after losing the Battle of Pharsalus.  For ten points, name this Roman general who served in the First Triumvirate with Crassus and Caesar.	ANSWER: Pompeythe Great
Pittsburgh Pirates player Roberto Clemente died in an airplane accident en route to this nation.  As a filibuster, William Walker overthrew this country’s government.  Violeta Chamorro led this nation in the 1990s, ending a war in which one side was controversially supported by Ronald Reagan’s administration. Sandinista leader Daniel Ortega currently leads, for ten points, what Central American nation with capital Managua?	ANSWER:Nicaragua
During one campaign, this man’s running mate asked “Who am I? Why am I here?” in a debate’s opening statement.  During that campaign, this man claimed that a “giant sucking sound” could be heard as NAFTA funneled jobs to Mexico.  This founder of Electronic Data Systems spent $60 million on his campaign, but finished third behind George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton.  For ten points, name this Texan billionaire who ran as an independent in the 1992 Presidential election.	ANSWER: Henry Ross Perot
Donald McCraig authored a 2007 sequel to this novel about one of its central characters’ exile from Charleston.   A  confrontation on  a  staircase  in  this  novel  leads  to  its pregnant  protagonist  breaking  her ribs.   This  novel  ends  with  the  protagonist  optimistically  stating  that  “tomorrow  is  another  day”.   For ten points, name this Margaret Mitchell novel set in Civil War-era Georgia, whose 1939 film adaptation starred  Vivien  Leigh  as  Scarlett  O’Hara  and  is  the  inflation-adjusted  most  successful  film  in  box  office history.	ANSWER: GonewiththeWind
This  event  inspired  Charles  Perrow’sNormal Accidents,  and  it  was  analyzed  by  the  Kemeny commission.   A  hydrogen  bubble  was  vented  into  the  air  four  days  after  this  incident,  which  occurred because of a stuck relief valve in Unit 2.  Although nobody died because of this accident near Harrisburg, public reaction to it led to the cancellation of over fifty planned reactors.  For ten points, name this 1979 incident in which a Pennsylvania nuclear plant went into partial meltdown.	ANSWER: ThreeMileIslandincident (or accident, etc.) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 9
This man gave a series of benefit concerts in response to the Great Fire of Hamburg, and his travels with Countess Marie d’Agoult inspired his Years of Pilgrimage.  He included slow “lassan” and fast “friska” sections in a set of nineteen works, the fifteenth which was based on the “Rakoczi March.” Heinrich Heine coined a term to describe the frenzied reception he received in Berlin.  For ten points, name this virtuoso Romantic pianist who wrote theHungarian Rhapsodiesand was the subject of a namesake “mania.”	ANSWER: Franz Liszt(orLisztFerenc)
This man was hired by the Muscovy Company to find a route to Japan and China, but ice fields at Svalbard cut his journey.  Members of this man’s crew on theDiscoverymutinied and left him with his teenage son on a small boat in a body of water now named for him.  For ten points, name this English explorer  whose  expeditions  for  the  Dutch  East  India  Company  paved  way  for  the  colonization  of  New York, where a river is also named for him.	ANSWER: HenryHudson
This  city’s  Moran  Hill  is  home  to  a  Friendship  Tower  built  in  1959,  as  well  as  a  triumphal  arch commemorating the resistance against Japanese rule.  The Taedong River flows through this city, passing by the Juche Tower.  An unfinished 105-story pyramidal building, Ryugyong Hotel, dominates the skyline of, for ten points, what Asian capital city where Kim Jong-un governs?	ANSWER: Pyongyang
One ruler of this dynasty beheaded Jafar Yahya, leading to the decline of the Barmakid family.  That ruler of this dynasty, Harun Al-Rashid, created the House of Wisdom and gave Charlemagne the elephant Abul-Abbas.  This dynasty’s capital, Baghdad, was sacked by the Mongols in 1258.  For ten points, name this Islamic caliphate that succeeded the Umayyad dynasty.	ANSWER: AbbasidCaliphate
Genoese crossbowmen were hacked down by friendly forces while retreating during this battle, and one commander at this battle adopted the motto and crest of the blind King John of Bohemia, who died at this battle.  That commander was refused help by his father in this battle, saying “let the boy win his spurs”; those commanders were Edward the Black Prince and Edward III. The dominance of the longbow was confirmed in, for ten points, what first decisive English victory in the Hundred Years War?	ANSWER: Battle of Crecy
In self-defense, this man murdered a mutinous sailor named Blackton on the island of Tobago. Years after completing his most notable service, this man became a rear admiral in  the  Russian  Imperial  Navy  under  Catherine  the  Great.  When  encountering  the Serapis, this  man  supposedly  shouted,  "I  have  not  yet  begun  to  fight!"  For  ten  points,  name  this captain of the Bonhomme Richard [[bohn-ohm-ree-SHAHRD]] and Revolutionary War hero, sometimes called the "Father of the American Navy."	ANSWER: John Paul Jones (accept John Paul)
A conflict in this region began in the Battle of the Bogside in 1969. The Sunningdale power-sharing  agreement  broke  down  after  a general  strike  in  this  region, and  a  sectarian conflict  in  this  region  led  to  the  fall  of  its  parliament  at Stormont.  Protesters  in  this territory’s city of Derry were fired on by paratroopers in “Bloody Sunday.” For ten points, name this smallest constituent country of the United Kingdom in which the Troubles started in the late 1960s.	ANSWER: Northern Ireland (or Tuaisceart Éireann; prompt on "Ireland" before "parliament," but do not accept or prompt after that)
Rebellions  near  Hanguguan  led  this  dynasty's  "Gentleman of  the  Palace,"  Zhao  Gao, to  lead  a  coup  to  assassinate  the  emperor.  Shang  Yang's  philosophy  of  Legalism  was  the primary ideology of this dynasty, which ended the Warring States period. The first emperor of  this  dynasty  died  from  an  "Elixir  of  Immortality"  and  was  responsible  for  the  terracotta army  in  Xi'an.  For  ten  points,  name  this  short-lived  dynasty  from  which  the  western  name for China is derived.	ANSWER: Qin [[CHIN]] Dynasty (accept Chin Dynasty)
A woman in drag named Tullia is nearly hanged by a leader of this empire, Ottone, in a   Vivaldi   pastoral   opera. The  Coronation  of  Poppaea,   the last   by   Claudio   Montiverdi, concerns  the  title  mistress's  attempt  to  be  crowned  queen  of  this  empire.  A  daughter  of  a Chief Druid named Norma jumps in a fire with her lover Pollione, the pro-consul of Gaul in this  empire,  at  the  end  of  a  Bellini  opera. Cesare [[CHAY-zah-ray]] e Cleopatra is  set  in,  for ten points, which ancient European empire?	ANSWER: Roman Empire (accept Rome; prompt on "Gaul" before mentioned)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 9
In an effort to promote this policy, the Technicolor film The Gang's All Here, starring Carmen Miranda, was partially subsidized by the federal government. The immediate effect of  this  policy  ended  the  lengthy  occupation  of  Haiti  and  terminated  the  Platt  Amendment, which had established U.S. hegemony over Cuba. Non-interventionism in Latin America was promoted by, for ten points, which New Deal-era foreign policy?	ANSWER: Good Neighbor Policy (accept Política de Buena Vecindad; or Política de Boa Vizinhança)
Akbar  the  Great  ordered  a  Persian  language  version  of  this  work  be  produced known  as the Razmnama [[rah-zem-NAH-mah]],  which  translates  to  "Book of  War." In  this work,  a  lengthy  journey  of  exile  to  the  Himalayas  leads  to  the  death  of  Draupadi.  The Pandava  and  Kaurava  families  clash  in  this  work's  Kurukshetra  War,  following  a  failed peace conference  led  by  Krishna.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Hindu  epic  written  in  Sanskrit which contains the Bhagavad Gita.	ANSWER: Mahabharata [[mah-hah-bah-RAH-tah]] (prompt on "Bhagavad-Gita" before mentioned)
Near the Syr Darya, this empire's forces burned their entire baggage train during the "Day of Thirst" while being harassed by the Turgesh Khanate. Forces of this dynasty's Yazid I killed Husayn ibn Ali to win the Battle of Karbala, sparking the Second Fitna. This dynasty fled  to  Iberia  after  being  overthrown  by  the  Abbasid  dynasty.  For  ten  points,  name  this successor of the "Rightly Guided" caliphs, an empire which conquered much of North Africa and Western Asia.	ANSWER: Umayyad Caliphate (accept al-Khilāfah al-ʾUmawīyah)
This  man's  work  on  animal respiration  utilized  his  friend  and  human  guinea  pig Armand Séguin [[seh-GWEEN]]. This scientist disproved the historically popular phlogiston [[FLOH-jis-tahn]] theory by showing that nothing new is produced by combustion. This man formulated the law of conservation of mass and named oxygen and hydrogen before being executed  during  the  French  Revolution.  For  ten  points,  name  this  French  scientist  who  is considered the father of modern chemistry.	ANSWER: Antoine Lavoisier (or Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier)
Because Septimius Severus was born in Leptis Magna, a former colony of this city, he gave all of its people Roman citizenship at the end of the 2nd Century. Alexander the Great crucified  2,000  survivors  in  this  city  after  he  built  an  artificial  causeway to  subjugate  its island  portion.  This  city names  a  type  of  purple  dye  from  the murex snail,  most  commonly associated   with   imperial   power   in   antiquity.   For   ten   points,   name   this   Phoenician metropolis in modern-day Lebanon.	ANSWER: Tyre (accept Tyros; or Sur)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 9
The  short-lived  Free  State  of  Bottleneck  was  created  in  this  region  from  a  narrow gap  in  the  Wisper  Valley  between  Allied  occupation  zones.  A  brief  "Cis"  Republic  in  this region was a client state of Revolutionary France before being annexed. A pact recognizing this region's western borders was the principal portion of the Locarno Treaties in 1925. In direct   violation   of   the   Treaty   of   Versailles   [[vehr-SYE]],   Adolf   Hitler   ordered   the remilitarization of, for ten points, what region in 1936?	ANSWER: Rhineland (prompt on "Rhine" alone; prompt on "Germany")   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 9
Rebel officers from this empire brutally killed 72 prominent intellectuals in another country in the Slaughter of the Knezes. This empire’s military defeated Uros the Weak at the Battle of Maritsa in 1371; eighteen years later, Prince Lazar and a leader of this opposing empire were each killed at the Field of Blackbirds.  Murad  I  led  this  empire  at  the  Battle  of  Kosovo.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Islamic  power whose sultans controlled Serbia from Constantinople.	ANSWER: OttomanEmpire
A  player  of  this  instrument  who  died  at  a  young  age  due  to  multiple  sclerosis  was  married  to conductor Daniel  Barenboim. This  is the  main instrument  of the  founder of the  Silkroad ensemble  and arts non-profit. On the day that Soviet troops invaded Czechoslovakia to end the Prague Spring, Dvorak’s B  minor  concerto  for  this  instrument  was  performed  by  Mstislav  Rostropovich.  Jacqueline  du  Pr ́e  and Yo-Yo Ma play, for ten points, what large string instrument?	ANSWER: cello
A fleet of 49 ships on the victorious side of this battle was commanded by Charles Saunders. Members of the 78th Highlanders were able to make a surprise landing the night before this battle because one side was expecting a supply convoy. A general at this battle claimed that only 100 men were needed to guard L’Anse au Foulon. For ten points, name this battle in the Canadian theater of the Seven Years’ War where the Marquis de Montcalm and James Wolfe, the generals of the opposing sides, were both killed.	ANSWER: Battle of Quebec(accept Battle of thePlainsofAbraham)
This  man  defeated  incumbent  New  Deal  opponent  Roscoe  Patterson  in  a  1934  Senate  election.  In one speech, this man acknowledged the success of a recent economic program that started with “16 free nations;” that speech supported the Marshall Plan, which had been signed into law by this man in 1948. For ten points, name this man who won the first presidential election after World War II and succeeded Franklin Roosevelt.	ANSWER: Harry Truman
A poem written during this period describes the sound of war vehicles as they approach the battle field;  that  poem  is  “The  Song  of  Wagons.”  Another  poet  during  this  period  allegedly  drowned  after drunkenly trying to hug the reflection of the moon in a pond. Du Fu and Li Bai wrote during the rule of this dynasty, which faced the An Lushan Rebellion under Emperor Xuanzong. Empress Wu established the Second Zhou dynasty during, for ten points, what Chinese dynasty that existed between the Sui and Song dynasties?	ANSWER: TangDynasty Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 10
According to myth, a king named Tuu Ku Ihu moved these objects with the help of a fertility god. Many  of  these  objects  were  toppled  after  they  were  discovered  by  Jacob  Roggeveen.  Several  of  these objects, which were often topped with a topknot structure called a pukao, are found at a site called Ahu Akivi.  One  of  these  objects  at  the  British  Museum  is  called  Hoa  Hakananai’a,  and  these  objects  were often set on stone platforms called ahu. The Rapa Nui people worshiped, for ten points, what stone heads on Easter Island?	ANSWER: Moaistatues (prompt on descriptions of the stone heads on Easter Island before it is read)
This ship’s second to last captain, Daniel Dow, resigned from stress after the Louis and Laverock failed to escort it. TheJunoarrived too late to rescue this ship’s passengers, which included Alfred Vanderbilt. Failure to follow a zig-zag pattern may have led to this ship’s sinking. William Jennings Bryan resigned after the downing of this ship, which was carrying 50 tons of shell casings at the time it was destroyed in the North Atlantic. 128 Americans drowned on this ship. For ten points, the United States entered World War I after what ship was torpedoed by a U-Boat?	ANSWER: RMS Lusitania
This group’s second and final leader was Robert Greim, who was appointed to his post after covertly traveling  to  Tiergarten  with  Hanna  Reitsch.  This  force,  which  was  greatly  expanded  by  Walter  Wever and Albert Kesselring, employed the Ju-87 in Spain as part of the Condor Legion that bombed Guernica. Operation  Sealion  was  canceled  when  this  group  was  defeated  by  the  RAF  in  the  Battle  of  Britain. Hermann Goring led, for ten points, what Nazi air force?	ANSWER:Luftwaffe(prompt on descriptions of the Nazi German air force before the end)
TheMatoasank  in  this  lake  in  a  1913  storm  that  killed  over  200  sailors  across  nearly  a  dozen ships. This lake’s town of Goderich has been a salt mining center since the 1800s. This lake contains the Georgian  Bay,  which  is  bounded  by  the  largest  freshwater  island  in  the  world.  Manitoulin  Island  and Saginaw Bay are in this lake, which the Saint Marys River feeds from Lake Superior. For ten points, name this American Great Lake that forms the northeastern border of Michigan.	ANSWER: Lake Huron
This  man’s  administration  is  seen  as  the  beginning  of  the  American  spoils  system,  because  he replaced  919  officials  upon  election.  This  man  supposedly  declared  “Marshall  has  made  his  decision, now let him enforce it” in response to the Supreme Court decision inWorcester v. Georgia. The Indian Removal Act was put into law by, for ten points, what seventh president of the United States?	ANSWER: Andrew Jackson Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 10
One leader of this country wanted to create a buffer state called “Intermarium” out of his country and its neighbors. This country, which lost a plebiscite awarding control of the Teschen district, defeated an invading force under Marshal Tukachevsky; the key battle of that campaign took place in this country’s capital and was nicknamed the “Miracle on the Vistula”. For ten points, name this country led by Jozef Pilsudski.	ANSWER: Poland
This initiative supplanted Directive 1067 and was in turn replaced by the Mutual Security Agency. This initiative was adopted after Herbert Hoover noted that a “pastoral state” would be the outcome of the opposing Morgenthau Plan. Greece and Turkey were the first countries to adopt this plan, and Joseph Stalin ordered Warsaw Pact nations not to accept its money. Harry Truman’s Secretary of State names, for ten points, what American plan that offered economic aid to Europe after World War II?	ANSWER: MarshallPlan (orEuropeanRecoveryProgram; acceptERP)
This  man  violated  the  sovereignty  of  a  neighboring  country  by  recognizing  the  Act  of  Free  Choice assemblies, and he turned the Golkar group into a personal political machine. The Santa Cruz Massacre occurred as part of this man’s attempts to crack down on FRETILIN, a revolutionary group in a breakaway region of his country. This man recruited the so-called “Berkeley Mafia” to create economic growth in a regime he called the “New Order.” For ten points, name this politician who succeeded Sukarno as leader of Indonesia.	ANSWER: Suharto
In a novel written in this language, Bartlebooth spends a decade learning how to paint before going on a trip around the world. Another novel in this language was written entirely without the use of the letter  E  as  part  of  the  Oulipo movement.Life: A User’s ManualandA Voidwere  written  by  Georges Perec in, for ten points, what language in whichThe StrangerandNo Exitwere written by Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus?	ANSWER: French
During this year, the USSVandaliafaced off against German ships in Samoa until it was destroyed by a cyclone. The Enabling Act was signed during it to split the Dakota Territory, and the “Sooners” and “Boomers” flooded to settle Oklahoma in this year. The Great Johnstown Flood devastated Pennsylvania during it, the first year where the “Billion Dollar Congress” met. For ten points, name this year in which Benjamin Harrison began his term as US President.	ANSWER: 1889 Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 10
Shuck Yee invented a machine to mass produce these things, which Seiichi Kito claims were inspired by  the  Omikuji  tradition.  A  tea  garden  was  said  to  have  been  the  venue  where  the  first  of  these  were served in the 1890’s; that example was allegedly baked in San Francisco. Sesame seed oil is generally used to make, for ten points, what foodstuff that was notably not invented in China and contains a supposed prophecy on a paper slip?	ANSWER: fortunecookie
This  city’s  St.  Anne’s  Church  contains  the  tombs  of  three  brothers  of  the  Fugger  family,  whose banking  enterprise  operated  here.  The  painter  Hans  Holbein  the  Younger  was  born  in  this  city,  where a 1555 peace treaty was signed to end a war between the Schmalkaldic League and Charles V. Charles had  earlier  convened  a  Diet  in  this  city  where  Philip  Melancthon  helped  draft  a  namesake  Lutheran Confession. For ten points, name this Free Imperial City in Bavaria.	ANSWER:Augsburg
Description acceptable. This action, as proposed in UN Resolution 181, was rejected by one side of the discussion. Haganah and the Irgun agitated for this action, whose early advocates included Theodor Herzl. The Balfour Declaration established British support for this action, whose eventual realization led to an outpouring of hundreds of thousands of refugees from the West Bank. A 1948 war accompanied, for ten points, what geopolitical action that followed the end of the British Mandate for Palestine?	ANSWER: creationofIsrael(accept  equivalent  descriptions;  accept  descriptions  ofseparatestates forJewsandPalestinians(orJewsandArabs, etc.) in Israel/Middle East)
This  man  ordered  that  the  government  store  its  funds  in  vaults  rather  than  banks  as  part  of  the independent treasury he created. The popularity of this man plummeted after Charles Ogle accused him of lavish spending in the Gold Spoon Oration. This man was forced to carry out his predecessor’s Specie Circular executive order, leading to the Panic of 1837. For ten points, name this Democratic president, a Dutch-American from New York.	ANSWER: Martin vanBuren
An interregnum in this empire was resolved at the Battle of Camurlu. A rebellion against this empire was led by one of its former generals, Skanderbeg. This country’s government was known as the Sublime Porte and was once based in Edirne. One ruler of this country, Bayezid the Thunderbolt, was captured by Timur at the Battle of Ankara. For ten points, name this empire that was led by Murad II and other sultans from modern Turkey.	ANSWER: OttomanEmpire Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 10
In this state, the bookThe Meritorious Price of Our Redemptionwas burned for heresy; its author, William  Pynchon,  founded  this  state’s  town  of  Springfield.  Edmund  Andros  was  captured  by  rebels  in what became this state in 1689, marking the end of the Dominion of New England. John Winthrop led a “Bay Colony” named after this state, which contains the site where the Pilgrims aboard theMayflower established  the  Plymouth  Colony.  For  ten  points,  name  this  state  where  colonists  founded  the  city  of Boston.	ANSWER: Massachusetts
This country established relations with Ethiopia’s Dawit II after settling the Swahili Coast. To defend against  this  country,  the  Sultanate  of  Oman  built  the  Old  Fort  in  Zanzibar.  After  the  collapse  of  its Estado Novo, this country relinquished its colonies in Angola and Mozambique. For ten points, name this country whose caravel ships explored the world under Vasco de Gama and Henry the Navigator.	ANSWER: Portugal
As  part  of  this  man’s  business  partnership  with  Bruce  Sherman,  he  serves  as  CEO  and  oversees operations despite owning less than 5 percent of his team; as a result, he has received criticism for trading Marcell Ozuna and Giancarlo Stanton in the most recent Miami Marlins firesale. This man, who finished his playing career with the sixth most hits in history, became known as “Mr. November” for a clutch home run in 2001. For ten points, name this legendary shortstop for the New York Yankees who retired in 2014.	ANSWER: Derek Jeter
During this battle, reinforcements sent down the Hagerstown turnpike dissolved almost immediately when  commander  Joseph  Mansfield  was  shot.  After  heavy  fighting  at  Miller’s  Cornfield,  Dunker Church, and the Bloody Lane, the winning commander was criticized for failing to pursue his foes. The Emancipation Proclamation was issued shortly after this battle. George McClellan won at, for ten points, what 1862 battle in Maryland that proved to be the costliest single day in the Civil War?	ANSWER: Battle of Antietam(accept Battle ofSharpsburg)
In an attempt to assassinate this ruler, Giuseppe Fieschi constructed a 25 barrel volley gun known as the Machine Infernale. This man’s Foreign Minister, Francois Guizot, fought with Lord Palmerston over the Spanish Queen Isabella II during the Affair of the Spanish Marriages. This King was frequently drawn as a pear by Honor ́e Daumier [on-or-aydoh-me-ay]. This man came to power during the July Revolution and was overthrown in 1848. For ten points, name this French citizen king.	ANSWER:Louis-PhilippeI (prompt on “Citizen King” until mentioned) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 10
Description acceptable. The first known scientist to propose this theory was Aristarchus of Samos, who  based  his  hypothesis  on  estimating  the  sizes  of  the  objects  involved.  This  theory,  which  argued  in opposition to the Ptolemaic[toh-le-may-ik] model, was promoted inDialogue  Concerning  the  Two  Chief World  Systems, a book that led to Galileo’s house arrest. For ten points, name this astronomical theory proposed by Copernicus as a replacement for geocentrism.	ANSWER: heliocentrism(accept word forms; accept descriptions of “theSunisatthecenterof the Solar System and/or Universe;” accept descriptions of “theEarth(orplanets, etc.)orbitstheSun;” prompt on Copernicanism)
The author of this poem got his start composing literature when he saw a hunter kill a male crane in front of its mate. A woman in this poem uses one of two boons given to her by a king to order the king’s son into a fourteen-year exile in a forest. A ten-headed figure in this poem abducts a woman and holds her captive on the island of Lanka. Hanuman aids the title character in rescuing his wife Sita in, for ten points, what Indian epic poem often compared to theMahabharata?	ANSWER: Ramayana
Kenneth Bianchi was arrested in 1979 for committing two murders in Washington and 10 murders in this state as the “Hillside Strangler.” In this state, Elizabeth Short was murdered and her corpse severed in two in what became known as the Black Dahlia Murder. The symbol of a circle with a plus sign drawn through it was used by a murderer in this state who sent four ciphers to the police. For ten points, name this state where the Zodiac Killer terrorized San Francisco.	ANSWER:California
A palace in this region contained the Moorish Hall and Hall of the Singers, though neither of those were  finished  once  the  king  mysteriously  died  in  the  waters  of  Lake  Starnberg.  In  this  region,  a  hill overlooking  Hohenschwangau  village  was  the  site  of  a  fortress  that  inspired  the  Sleeping  Beauty  castle, Neuschwanstein [noysh-van-stein]. The “Mad King” Ludwig II once ruled, for ten points, what German region whose capital is Munich?	ANSWER:Bavaria
In  the  1850s,  Frederick  Cumberland  lost  a  conflict  over  a  leadership  position  in  this  industry to  Sandford  Fleming.  A  milestone  in  this  industry  was  celebrated  in  the  town  of  Craigellachie.  Hugh Allan  received  kickbacks  in  a  scandal  involving  this  industry,  which  toppled  the  government  of  John A. Macdonald. A company in this industry names the CN tower in Toronto. For ten points, name this industry that was involved in the Pacific Scandal and that completed a transcontinental connection across Canada in 1885.	ANSWER: Canadian railroads Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 10
The  Cascajal[kas-kah-hal]  Block  hints  at  a  writing  system  for  this  culture.  An  excavation  at  this culture’s El Manati site unearthed the Las Limas figure, a prominent example of were-jaguar art. These people were the first to play the “ball game,” and their ability to extract latex from nearby trees led them to be known as the “rubber people.” For ten points, name this oldest Mesoamerican civilization, known for the construction of large stone heads.	ANSWER: Olmeccivilization
This  conflict  essentially  ended  after  the  Battle  of  Ascalon.  During  this  military  campaign,  Peter Bartholomew  boosted  morale  when  he  claimed  to  have  unearthed  a  relic  in  the  city  of  Antioch.  This campaign was initiated by a speech proclaiming “Deus vult!”, or “God wills it!”, by Urban II. This conflict led to the establishment of kingdoms in Edessa and Jerusalem. For ten points, name this initial medieval campaign to capture the Holy Land.	ANSWER: FirstCrusade(prompt on Crusade(s))
Six  decades  after  one  city  lost  this  status,  the  Mississippi  River  changed  course  and  separated  the city from the rest of its state. After Kaskaskia and Vandalia held this status in the early 19th century, it was held by a city that is home to Oak Ridge Cemetery and was the site of the “House Divided” speech. For ten points, name this political status that has been held since 1837 by Springfield, where Abraham Lincoln thus served as a state representative.	ANSWER: capitals ofIllinois(prompt on partial answer; prompt on “state capital” by asking “what state?”)
A leader of these people named Rollo was granted the Duchy of Normandy by Charles the Simple, while another leader of this group founded the Rurik Dynasty in Russia. Members of this group formed the Great Heathen Army, which invaded the British Isles to avenge the death of Ragnar Lodbrok. These people sacked the monastery of Lindisfarne and sailed to Greenland and Vinland on their longships. For ten points, name these Scandinavian raiders.	ANSWER: Vikings (orNorsemen; acceptVarangians after “Rurik” is said)
A captain of this type of ship, John Worden, was partially blinded in combat from a nearby explosion. John Ericsson designed one of these ships whose wreck was discovered off the coast of Cape Hatteras in 1973 and which mostly floated a foot and a half above the waterline. The USSCumberlandwas rammed and sunk by this type of ship, two of which fought to a standstill in the Battle of Hampton Roads. For ten points, name this type of armored ship, exemplified by theMonitorand theVirginia.	ANSWER: ironclads  (prompt  on  descriptive  answers  about  armored  ships  before  said;  prompt  on Monitor before read; prompt on Virginia or Merrimack before read) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 10
This  work’s  second  and  third  movements  were  inspired  by  Henry  Wadsworth  Longfellow’sSong of Hiawatha.  William  Arms  Fischer  later  added  lyrics  to  an  English  horn  solo  from  this  piece’s  second movement  to  create  the  quasi-spiritual  “Goin’  Home.”  A  flute  melody  in  this  work’s  first  movement supposedly resembles “Swing Low, Sweet Chariot.” An 1893 journey to Iowa inspired, for ten points, what final symphony of Antonin Dvorak?	ANSWER: Symphonyno.9in  D  minor,  “From  the  New  World”  (orNewWorldSymphony; “Symphony” not needed after mentioned)
This man was succeeded by Caleb Strong as Governor after the Boston Gazette published Elkanah Tisdale’s cartoon attacking him. This man, along with John Marshall and Charles Pickney, met agents of Talleyrand who demanded a bribe in the XYZ affair. A political cartoon of a dragon representing the unorthodox shape of Essex County lampooned, for ten points, what Massachusetts politician whose name now describes the practice of drawing congressional districts for political gain?	ANSWER: Elbridge Gerry(acceptgerrymandering)
This physicist worked with the mathematician Roger Penrose on singularity theory. This man names a type of radiation that occurs due to pair production near the event horizon of a black hole. This Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge from 1979 to 2009 was the subject of the 2014 filmThe Theory of Everything. For ten points, name this British physicist, an expert in black holes and the author ofA Brief History of Time.	ANSWER: Stephen Hawking
In this country, a duel between Alan Breck and the son of an outlaw is settled by a contest involving musical instruments rather than with weapons. Frank Osbaldistone pursues his cousin to this country in a novel that was admired by this country’s native author, Robert Louis Stevenson. The primary setting ofKidnappedandRob Royis, for ten points, what country, the site of the Battle of Culloden during a Jacobite Rising?	ANSWER: Scotland(prompt on Great Britain or United Kingdom)
Many immigrants of this ethnicity arrived in the U.S. by the credit-ticket system. Denis Kearney gained fame for speeches attacking members of this ethnicity, who entered the U.S. after the passage of the Burlingame Treaty. People of this ethnicity were brought to America to build the western legs of the Transcontinental Railroad, and their immigration was targeted by an 1882 Exclusion Act. For ten points, name this immigrant group who established namesake “towns” in cities like San Francisco.	ANSWER: Chinese-Americans Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 10
This  country  was  the  birthplace  of  the  starting  shortstop  and  first  baseman  for  the  2015  Chicago White  Sox,  Alexei  Ramirez  and  Jose  Abreu.    The  names  of  players  like  Yunel  Escobar  and  Yoenis Cespedes, begin with “Y,” as inspired by this country’s former ties with diplomats like Yuri Pavlov.  For ten points, name this country from which Aroldis Chapman and Yasiel Puig defected, leaving behind the only Communist government in Latin America.	ANSWER: Cuba
Potential  violations  of  this  law  are  considered  using  the  “rule  of  reason”  doctrine.   The  Danbury Hatters  court  case  applied  this  law  to  labor  unions,  but  it  did  not  apply  to  manufacturing  after  the government failed in their suit against the E.C. Knight Company.  The Standard Oil Company was broken up using, for ten points, what 1890 antitrust law, named for an Ohio senator and later modified by the Clayton Antitrust Act?	ANSWER:ShermanAntitrustAct
This  party  engaged  in  frequent  violent  clashes  against  the  Inkatha  Freedom  Party,  and  one  leader defected from this party to form the Economic Freedom Fighters.  This party’s armed division, Umkhonto we Sizwe, was established in response to the Sharpeville massacre.  This party first rose to power in 1994, defeating  F.W.  De  Klerk’s  National  Party.   Jacob  Zuma  is  the  current  leader  of,  for  ten  points,  what anti-apartheid party in South Africa?	ANSWER: AfricanNationalCongress (acceptUmkhontoweSizwebefore mentioned)
This  artistic  style  dominates  Frederick  the  Great’s  summer  palace  at  Sanssouci.   The  portraits  of Madame de Pompadour by Franccois Boucher are in this style, whose name may be derived from a term for “shell.” A painting from this movement used by Antoine Watteau shows a man peeking up the skirt of  his  lover  as  she  kicks  her  shoe  off  from  the  title  contraption.   Watteau’sPilgrimage to Cytheraand Fragonard’sThe Swingare  in,  for  ten  points,  what  18th  century  French  art  period  that  succeeded  the Baroque?	ANSWER: Rococo(accept FredericianRococobefore “Madame de Pompadour” is read)
In  1941,  Lake  Roosevelt  was  created  in  this  state  by  the  construction  of  the  Grand  Coulee  Dam. In  this  state,  the  Cayuse  Indians  attacked  missionaries  in  the  Whitman  massacre,  sparking  a  war  near modern-day  Walla  Walla.   This  state’s  Elliott  Bay  is  overlooked  by  the  world’s  largest  public  farmer’s market on Pike Place.  Puget Sound juts into, for ten points, what Pacific Northwest state with capital Seattle, named in honor of the first U.S. President?	ANSWER: Washington Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 10
One action in this city led to the escalation of Operation Chammal.  Twelve people, including Cabu and Charb,  were killed in a January 2015 office shooting in this city.  The Eagles of Death Metal were interrupted during a performance in this city, though a “double-tap” incident was avoided at a friendly soccer match attended by Franccois Hollande.  The Bataclan theater was attacked in, for ten points, what city, the site of the January 2015Charlie Hebdoshooting and a November 13th attack claimed by ISIS?	ANSWER: Paris
This leader defeated the Sherden sea pirates on his land’s coast.  This ruler commissioned a building with a hypostyle hall to commemorate his rule with his wife Nefertari.  This man, who commissioned the Temple of Abu Simbel, signed the world’s first peace treaty with Hittite ruler Hattusili III after winning the largest chariot battle in history at Kadesh.  For ten points, name this “great” Egyptian pharaoh.	ANSWER:RamsesIIorRamsestheGreat
This amendment was cited inPresser v. Illinois, which allowed states to ban groups like the ethnic German  “Instruct  and  Defend  Association.”  The  2010  caseMcDonald v.  Chicagoincorporated  this amendment to the states afterD.C. v. Helleroverturned a law requiring “trigger locks.” The phrase “A well regulated militia” begins, for ten points, what Constitutional amendment that protects the right to “keep and bear arms?”	ANSWER: SecondAmendment to the U.S. Constitution
The Brunswick Manifesto was proclaimed by this man’s cousin in an attempt to save this man’s life, and his son is known as the “Lost Dauphin”.  This king’s wife was involved in the Affair of the Diamond Necklace, and his failure to consummate his marriage with that woman was due to his phimosis.  After dismissing Jacques Necker, this monarch faced the Women’s March on Versailles, after which he was held captive  in  Paris.   For  ten  points,  name  this  husband  of  Marie  Antoinette,  a  French  monarch  who  was guillotined during the French Revolution.	ANSWER: King LouisXVI(prompt on Louis)
A  breach  in  the  Porta  Pia  of  this  city  led  to  its  capture  on  the  Venti  Settembre,  and  Benvenuto Cellini  claimed  to  have  shot  Charles,  Duke  of  Orleans  while  defending  the  Castel  Sant’Angelo  in  this city.  Piedmont-Sardinia’s capture of this city was unsuccessfully resisted by Papal zouaves, leading to the capital of a new country being moved here from Florence.  For ten points, name this capital city of Italy.	ANSWER:Rome
The merger of the Sveno and the Bolshevik Workers Party into the Fatherland Front overthrew this nation's monarchy following a Soviet invasion. This European nation lost the Second  Balkan  War  against  its  former  allies  of Serbia  and  Greece,  losing  territory  in Macedonia  and  Thrace.  Tsars  such  as  Ferdinand  I  and  Boris  III  led,  for  ten  points,  what member of the Axis governed from the city of Sofia?	ANSWER: Tsardom of Bulgaria (or Tsarstvo Balgariya; accept "Kingdom" in place of "Tsardom")
Lesser-known theories for the start of this event include a game of craps or possibly even  a  meteor  shower.  The  two  original  scapegoats  for  this  event  were  finally  cleared  of responsibility  in  1997  by  a  city  council,  126  years  after  this event  took  place.  Several buildings,  such  as  St.  James  Cathedral  and  Unity  Church,  survived  this  event  although  not without  scorch  marks.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1871  disaster,  legendarily started  by  Mrs. O'Leary's cow.	ANSWER: Great Chicago Fire of 1871
At  Thalamae  [[THAL-ah-mee]],  a  cult  center  dedicated  to  a  queen  of  this  island named Pasiphaë [[PASS-if-fee]] was a pilgrimage site for travelers seeking an oracle. A king of  this  realm  named  Deucalion  [[doo-KAY-lee-on]]  was  slain  by  the  departing  Theseus outside  the  gates  of  Knossos  [[kuh-NAH-sus]],  which  was  a  major  site  of  a  Bronze  Age civilization on this island. The Minoans once ruled, for ten points, what Aegean Island?	ANSWER: Crete (or Kriti)
The name for this object was suggested by an eleven-year old, and other suggested names  for  it  were  Zeus  and  Percival.  When  this  heavenly  body  was  discovered  by  Clyde Tombaugh in 1930, it disproved Percival Lowell's Planet X theory. Neil deGrasse Tyson said that  allowing  this  object  to  be  a  planet  would  be  an  "insult"  to  the  other  planets.  For  ten points, name this trans-Neptunian dwarf planet in the Kuiper [[KY-per]] Belt that was once called the "Ninth Planet".	ANSWER: Pluto  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 10
In  1980,  this  man  sent  a  large  number  of  criminals  and  mental  patients  among  a group  of  dissidents  allowed  to  leave  his  country  in  the  Mariel  boatlift.  In  1961,  the Democratic  Revolutionary  Front  launched  a  disastrous  attempt  to  overthrow  this  man known as the "Bay of Pigs" invasion. Two years earlier, this man took power after deposing Fulgencio  Batista  [[ful-JEN-syoh  bah-TEE-stah]]  with  the  aid  of  Che  Guevara  [[cheh  geh- VAH-rah]]. For ten points, name this revolutionary who was the dictator of communist Cuba from 1959 to 2008.	ANSWER: Fidel Castro (or Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz)
This  man  earned  the  nickname  "Greekling"  for  his  flamboyant  nature  and  love  of Plato. This man was criticized for mourning openly after his beloved Antinous [[an-TIN-oh- us]]  drowned  in  the  Nile  in  130  A.D.  This  man's  primary  supporter  and  aunt,  Pompeia Plotina   [[pom-PAY-ah   ploh-TYE-nah]],   supposedly   hired   someone   to   impersonate   her husband  Trajan  to  appoint  this  man  as  Trajan's  successor.  For  ten  points,  name  this member of the "Five Good Emperors" who built a namesake wall across Britannia.	ANSWER: Hadrian (accept Caesar Traianus Hadrianus)
As a lawyer, this man worked on Senator John Smith's expulsion case and served as Sam  Houston's  attorney  after  the  latter  caned  William  Stanbery.  This  man's  most  famous effort  came  during  an  episode  in  which  he  was  a  dinner  guest  to  Vice  Admiral  Alexander Cochrane [["COCK"-rin]] aboard the HMS Tonnant. This man composed a song to the tune of "To  Anacreon  in  Heaven"  during  the  bombardment  of  Fort  McHenry.  For  ten  points,  name this American composer of "The Star-Spangled Banner."	ANSWER: Francis Scott Key
Nominoe  became  the  first  king  of  this  region  after  he  and  his  local  Vannetais  tribe supported  Louis  the  Pious  in  the  fight  against  his  sibling  Lothair.  A  duchess  of  this  region name Anne of Monfort commissioned the tapestry Hunt of the Unicorn to commemorate her marriage to Louis XII [[the twelfth]]. This region, known as Breizh [[BREHSH]] in its native Celtic  tongue,  was  ruled  by  Henry  II  son's  Geoffrey  from  the  city  of  Rennes  [[REN]].The Edict of Nantes was signed in, for ten points, what region of Northwestern France?	ANSWER: Brittany (accept Breizh before mentioned; Accept Bretagne)
In  the  Neolithic  period  on  this  island,  a  group  of  standing  stones  likely  meant  to evoke fertility were rearranged by the Torrean [[toh-REH-ahn]] people at the Filitosa [[fee- lee-TOH-sah]]  site.  This  island,  which  the  launching  point  of  the  pro-De  Gaulle  Operation Resurrection,  was  ruled  for  nearly  five  hundred  years  by  a  republic  in  Liguria.  The  site  of the Maison Bonaparte, the birthplace of Napoleon, for ten points, what is this French island department?	ANSWER: Corsica (or Corse)  2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 10
Judy Clarke has been nicknamed “St. Jude” for her work in preventing this practice. Furman v. Georgia put a moratorium on this practice until the states could demonstrate they were no longer arbitrary or discriminatory in how this practice was done. Atkins v. Virginia ruled  that  the  intellectually  disabled  could  not  undergo  this  punitive  practice,  which  was applied to the Rosenbergs and Timothy McVeigh. For ten points, name this practice that was often accomplished with the electric chair.	ANSWER: Capital Punishment [accept the Death Penalty; or Executions; or Killing Prisoners)   2021-22 B-Set History Bowl - 2021-11-03  Round 10
This  woman  employed  the  Munshi  Abdul  Karim  as  an  Urdu  teacher,  and  she described  her  grandson,  William,  as  possessing  "little  heart  and  tact."  This  person  was advised  in  her  early  rule  by  Lord  Melbourne,  before  forming  a longtime  friendship  with Prime  Minister  Benjamin  Disraeli.  The  Crystal  Palace  Exhibition  was  the  brainchild  of  this ruler's husband, Albert. For ten points, name this long-reigning monarch, who presided over much of nineteenth-century Britain.	ANSWER: Queen Victoria (or Alexandrina Victoria)
One  theory  about  this  event  claimed  Judah  P.  Benjamin  perpetrated  it  by  enlisting the  help  of  the  Rothschild  banking  family  from  Europe.  Police  officer  John  Frederick Parker's abandonment of his post to grab a drink made this event possible. Major Rathbone was  stabbed  with  a  dagger  during  this  event,  shortly  before  a  man  shouted  "Sic  Semper Tyrannus"  during  a  performance  of Our American Cousin.  John  Wilkes  Booth  perpetrated, for ten points, what killing of the sixteenth president?	ANSWER: The Abraham Lincoln Assassination in Ford's Theater (accept word forms and descriptions involving the killing of Lincoln)
A character in this short story passes British spy Major Andre’s tree and loses his horse Gunpowder’s saddle  after  a  party  in  Tarry  Town.  In  this  story,  Katrina  Van  Tassel marries   Brom   Bones,   who   laughs   when   a   crushed   pumpkin   is   found   near   where   a schoolteacher, Ichabod Crane, has vanished while being chased by a Galloping Hessian. For ten points, name this short story by Washington Irving in which the title location is haunted by the Headless Horseman.	ANSWER: "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" (do not accept or prompt on "Tale of Sleepy Hollow")
The   Four   Books   and   Five   Classics   are   the   authoritative   texts   of   this   man's philosophy,  one  of  the  so-called  Hundred  Schools  of  Thought.  The  first  of  this  man's  Five Constants  is rén,  or  "humaneness."  This  man  believed  that  the  emperor's  Mandate  of Heaven  must  be  subject  to  absolute  moral  principles,  including  virtues  like  filial  piety.  For ten  points,  name  this  ancient  Chinese  philosopher  known  for  his  interpretation  of  the Golden Rule.	ANSWER: Confucius (accept Kǒng Fūzǐ; or Kongzi)  2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 1
A loan from this nation's Erlanger & Co. allowed the Confederacy to build ironclads as   blockade   runners.   Three   emissaries   from   this   nation   requested   bribes   from   U.S. diplomats  before  allowing  negotiations  with  Talleyrand  in  the  XYZ  Affair.  The  U.S.  fought the  Quasi-War  with  this  nation,  who  earlier  sent  armed  forces  to  the  Thirteen  Colonies during  the  Yorktown  campaign.  The  Louisiana  colony  was  sold  to  the  United  States  by,  for ten points, what European country?	ANSWER: Kingdom of France (or Royaume de France; accept Republic of France; or French First Republic; or République Française)
The  building  of  this  structure  was  supervised  by  Ustad  Ahmad  Lahauri,  who  also laid the foundations of the Red Fort. This building, whose name is derived from Persian, was ordered by an emperor who was put under house arrest by his successor, Aurangzeb [[ow- RAHNG-zeb]].  This  building  was  originally  constructed  to  house  the  tomb  of  Mumtaz.  For ten points, name this enormous mausoleum in Agra, India, constructed by Shah Jahan.	ANSWER: Taj Mahal (or Rauza-i Munawwara)
While en route to Western Europe, this man had 4,000 denarii seized in the port of Trebizond,  retaining  some  of  his  wealth  by  sewing  precious  stones  into  his  coat.  With Rustichello da Pisa, this man published his travelogue under the title Book of the Marvels of the World. That work describes this man's trip to the palace of Xanadu [[ZAN-ah-doo]] and his  travels  along  the  Silk Road.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Venetian  merchant  who  explored the Far East and served Kublai Khan.	ANSWER: Marco Polo
Various speeches by this man were mixed with modern musical accompaniment by progressive  rocker  Giulio  Neroni  in  the  album Wake  Up! Referencing  the  "calming  of  the storm" in the Book of Mark, this man gave an Urbi et Orbi address in the wake of the COVID- 19  pandemic.  The  2021  Synod  of  Bishops  was  called  by  this  figure  following  news  of  an abuse  scandal  in  France.  Jorge  Bergoglio  [[behr-GOH-lyoh]]  is  the  birth  name  of,  for  ten points, what pope from Argentina?	ANSWER: Pope Francis (accept Francis I; accept Jorge Bergoglio before mentioned)
Verrocchio  [[veh-ROH-kyoh]]  depicted  this  figure  in  bronze  following  his  most famous action, while Bernini sculpted a marble statue of this man during that same violent action.  Donatello's  sculpture  of  this  figure  was  the  first  freestanding  nude  since  antiquity, and  another  depiction  of  this  hero  has  an  oversized  head  to  appear  proportional  from below.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Biblical  king  who  was  depicted  in  a  marble  sculpture  by Michelangelo before he slays Goliath.	ANSWER: David (or Davit; accept Daud)  2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 1
In modern Spain, this general created a makeshift bridge to cross the Baetis [[BAY- tiss]]  River  to  win  the  Battle  of  Munda.  Tribes  like  the  Bibroci  [[bee-BROH-kee]]  and  the Ancalites  united  around  Cassibelanus  [[cah-see-beh-LAH-nus]]  in  a  failed  attempt  to  repel this  man's  invasion  of  Britannia.  This  writer  of De Bello Gallico defeated  and  captured  the King  Vercingetorix  [[ver-sin-GEH-toh-riks]]  during  the  Siege  of  Alesia.  The  Rubicon  was crossed by, for ten points, what Roman dictator?	ANSWER: Gaius Julius Caesar (prompt on "Caesar" alone)   2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 1
Joseph Warren was killed at this battle as one side retreated across Charlestown Neck after running out  of  gunpowder,  leaving  their  opponents  with  a  Pyrrhic  victory.  During  this  battle,  Israel  Putnam allegedly ordered his troops not to fire until they saw the whites of their enemies’ eyes as British troops stormed a redoubt on Breed’s Hill. For ten points, name this Boston-area battle that followed Lexington and Concord.	ANSWER: Battle of BunkerHill
The Tamworth Manifesto outlined the ideals of this modern political party. One prime minister from this party was a rival of William Gladstone and made Queen Victoria the “Empress of India.” Another prime minister from this party repealed the Corn Laws. This political party’s leaders included Benjamin Disraeli and founder Robert Peel. For ten points, name this British political party, sometimes called the Tories, that traditionally stands opposed to the Liberals and Labour.	ANSWER: ConservativeParty
The “Polyphase Phase” system was marketed under this man’s name, while the SI unit for magnetic flux density was named in his honor, 17 years after his 1943 death. George Westinghouse bought patents to  this  man’s  induction  motor,  which  prefaced  Westinghouse’s  company  partaking  in  the  “War  of Currents”  against  the  direct-current  based  Edison  Electric  Light  Company.  For  ten  points,  name  this Serbian-American who pioneered the use of alternating current systems.	ANSWER: Nikola Tesla
Justice Scalia wrote that this practice was becoming “a game” after a ruling exempting the mentally disabled from it. The Court ruled that judges alone could not decide on this practice inRing v. Arizona, and minors were exempted from it byRoper v. Simmons. Potential racial bias led the Supreme Court to declare  laws  on  this  practice  too  arbitrary  inFurman v. Georgia,  which  was  later  overturned.  For  ten points, name this practice of executing those convicted of serious crimes.	ANSWER: CapitalPunishment(acceptDeathPenaltyor equivalents)
Dwight Evans spent all but one year of his career with this team, which fielded three generations of Hall of Fame left fielders in Jim Rice, Carl Yastrzemski, and “The Kid.” Pedro Martinez moved to this team from the Montreal Expos and helped the team end its championship drought of 86 years, allegedly caused by the team’s sale of Babe Ruth to a certain rival team based in New York. For ten points, name this Major League baseball team that plays its home games in Fenway Park.	ANSWER: Boston RedSox Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 1
These people produced the Kunz Axe, a notably large ritual artifact made of jade that was consistent with the “were [WAIR]-jaguar motif” common in the art of these people. These people, the first to play the “ball game,” were also known as the “rubber people” for their ability to extract latex from trees. Their major sites included San Lorenzo and La Venta. For ten points, name this earliest known Meso-American civilization noted for producing giant stone heads.	ANSWER:Olmec
Thomas  Allen’s  song  “Low  Bridge”  focuses  on  this  structure  whose  creation  was  overseen  by  the “father of American Civil Engineering,” Benjamin Wright. Concerns arose that erosion of the Adirondack Mountains might damage this structure, which, in 1823, allowed laborers to reach the Niagara Escarpment. Containing thirty-four locks, this structure was originally traversed by long, thin vehicles known as packet boats at speeds under 5 miles an hour. For ten points, name this New York canal.	ANSWER: ErieCanal
This man was forced to respond to the rebellion of Luis Mena by beginning a twenty year military intervention in Nicaragua. This man notably used a “Saxbe fix” to hire Philander Knox as his Secretary of State, appointing him to carry out “Dollar diplomacy.” This Republican split votes with the Bull Moose party’s  Teddy  Roosevelt  in  1912,  allowing  Woodrow  Wilson  to  become  president.  For  ten  points,  name this man, the only person to serve both as president and Supreme Court justice.	ANSWER: William HowardTaft
This  figure  became  embroiled  in  a  scandal  when  telephone  conversations  with  James  Gilbey  were leaked in “Squidgygate.” Much to the displeasure of Earl Howe, this “loose cannon” was photographed on a battleground in Angola as part of a campaign against the usage of landmines. The intoxication of Henri Paul may have inadvertently caused the death of Dodi Fayed and this figure in a tunnel at Pont de l’Alma. For ten points, name this first wife of Prince Charles who was killed in a 1997 car accident in Paris.	ANSWER: Diana, Princess of Wales (acceptPrincessDiana; prompt on Di)
The fisherman Dictys took in this man and his mother after they were cast to sea in a wooden chest. This man received a magic wallet from Hermes and an invisibility helm from Hades. Grandfather to both Heracles and Helen of Troy, during one quest, this son of Danae stole a shared eye from the Gray Sisters. After killing a sea monster, this hero married Andromeda. For ten points, name this Greek hero who used a reflective shield during his slaying of Medusa.	ANSWER: Perseus Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 1
In 1908, Joseph Szombathy discovered a faceless depiction of this figure in the village of Willendorf. A Velazquez painting of this figure looking back at herself in a mirror was attacked by suffragette Mary Richardson. In another painting, this figure is blown by Zephyrus to shore and stands on a giant shell. An armless statue discovered on the island of Milos depicts, for ten points, what goddess whose birth is depicted in a painting by Sandro Botticelli?	ANSWER: Venus(acceptAphrodite;  acceptVenusof  Willendorf,  RokebyVenus,Venusde  Milo, and/or Birth ofVenus)
Henry Pelham created a depiction of this event titledThe Fruits of Arbitrary Power. John Adams declared that “facts are stubborn things” while successfully defending the perpetrators of this event. In Paul  Revere’s  depiction  of  this  event,  Thomas  Preston  is  shown  deliberately  ordering  an  attack  on  a gathered crowd. Crispus Attucks was killed in, for ten points, what 1770 event in which British soldiers fired on civilians in Massachusetts?	ANSWER: BostonMassacre(acceptIncidentonKingStreet)
This  country  was  forced  to  give  up  its  holdings  in  Estonia  in  the  Second  Treaty  of  Bromsebro. Germany  occupied  this  country  in  just  6  hours  in  Operation  Weserubung [VAY-ser-OO-bung].  In  1864, this country was invaded by Prussia, forcing it to give up Schleswig and Holstein. Margaret I united this country  with  Norway  and  Sweden  to  form  the  Kalmar  Union.  For  ten  points,  name  this  country  that, during World War II, did not oppose a German invasion in fear that they would bomb Copenhagen.	ANSWER:Denmark
When observing Saturn, this scientist claimed to see two “ears” that were later shown to be its rings. This author ofTwo New SciencesandDialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systemsdiscovered the phases of Venus and the four largest moons of Jupiter, a set that he now names. For ten points, name this Italian scientist who was put under house arrest by the Roman Inquisition for professing the Copernican heliocentric theory.	ANSWER: GalileoGalilei(accept either or both names)
This man formulated the “eight-point regulation” to make politicians “do real work” and “say real things.” InThe Governanceof his country, this politician wrote about combating corruption as well as the Belt and Road Initiative. In 2018, this man spearheaded the removal of Presidential term limits from his country’s constitution. Hu Jintao was succeeded by, for ten points, what current General Secretary of the Communist Party of China?	ANSWER: XiJinping Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
This ruler repudiated his marriage to Desiderata, the daughter of his rival Desiderius. A biography of this ruler by Einhard relates how he besieged and conquered Pavia, after which he took the title of King of the Lombards. Leo III urged this man to restore his authority from Roman conspirators, leading to his 800 AD coronation. For ten points, name this ruler of the Franks and Holy Roman Emperor.	ANSWER:Charlemagne(acceptCharlesIorCharlestheGreat)
This President’s policies were opposed by the “Four Horseman” of the Supreme Court. Owen Robert’s vote inWest Coast Hotel v. Parrishto uphold one of this President’s policies is referred to as the “switch in time that saved nine.” This President treated to “pack the court” if it didn’t support programs like the CCC and WPA. For ten points, name this President who tried to force the Supreme Court to support the New Deal.	ANSWER: Franklin DelanoRoosevelt(acceptFDR; prompt on Roosevelt)
A  May  2019  article  detailed  how  overcrowding  caused  eleven  people  to  die  while  performing  this action, some of whom passed away at the South Col. Today, many people performing this action adjust to altitude sickness by spending several days at a base camp in Nepal. Sherpa guide Tenzing Norgay and the explorer Edmund Hillary were the first to perform, for ten points, what feat of mountaineering in the Himalayas?	ANSWER: climbing MountEverest(accept equivalents, such asreachingthetopof MountEverest; prompt on partial answers such as mountain climbing)
This man purged his rivals by using a North Korean-trained brigade that carried out the “rain that washes away the chaff.” This man’s downfall came when he removed Emmerson Mnangagwa from office, likely  so  he  could  name  his  wife  Grace  as  Vice  President.  In  2000,  land  reforms  by  this  African  leader led to extreme hyperinflation. For ten points, name this head of the ZANU-PF who led Zimbabwe for 37 years.	ANSWER: Robert Mugabe
In  the  prelude  to  this  battle,  two  soldiers  found  the  other  side’s  orders  secretly  wrapped  around cigars.  Ambrose  Burnside  was  told  to  take  a  bridge  in  this  battle  “even  if  it  cost  10,000  men.”  In  the aftermath of this battle, George McClellan was removed from command after failing to pursue Confederate forces.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1862  battle  in  Maryland,  the  bloodiest  single-day  battle  in  American history.	ANSWER: Battle ofAntietam(accept Battle ofSharpsburg) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
A socialist opposition leader in this country named JM Kariuki was assassinated by an opponent’s bodyguard in 1975. Sir Evelyn Baring fought a rebellion in this country that targeted coffee plantations in the White Highlands and began with traditional oathing ceremonies among this country’s Kikuyu people. The Mau Mau rebellion attempted to achieve independence from Britain for, for ten points, what African country that was led by Jomo Kenyatta?	ANSWER: Kenya
This  deity  was  depicted  with  horns  in  many  reproductions  of  statues  made  during  Roman  rule, reflecting this god’s conflation with the Egyptian deity Ammon. Libon of Elis designed a Doric temple to house a depiction of this god, which was crafted using ivory and gold plates surrounding a wooden core by Phidias; that statue of this deity at Olympia was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. For ten points, name this Greek god often depicted in art wielding a thunderbolt.	ANSWER: Zeus
This project was funded by Charles Crocker and Mark Hopkins shortly after Samuel Curtis introduced a bill to build it. Congressman Oakes Ames was found to be laundering money from this project in the Credit Mobilier scandal. This project was completed at Promontory Point in 1869 when a golden spike was used to link the Union Pacific and Central Pacific routes. For ten points, name this project that linked the western and eastern United States.	ANSWER: first TranscontinentalRailroad
During  this  conflict,  Isaac  Komnenos  was  ousted  as  ruler  of  Cyprus.  Prior  to  this  conflict,  Guy  of Lusignan’s [gheeofloo-sin-yon’s]  Kingdom  of  Jerusalem  was  defeated  by  the  Ayyubid  Dynasty  at  the Battle of Hattin; Guy later led this conflict’s Siege of Acre[AH-kur]. While traveling during this conflict, Frederick Barbarossa drowned in the Saleph River. The Battle of Jaffa ended, for ten points, what crusade that ended in 1192 when Richard the Lionheart defeated Saladin?	ANSWER:ThirdCrusade
This  man  argued  that  Sam  Houston  used  self-defense  following  the  misfire  of  a  pistol  by  William Stanbery. Thomas Carr set a poem this man wrote to the tune “To Anacreon from Heaven;” that poem was written from a British ship during the attack on Fort McHenry in the War of 1812. The sight of an object “gallantly streaming” inspired, for ten points, what lawyer who described “the rockets’ red glare” in lyrics that became known as “The Star-Spangled Banner?”	ANSWER: Francis Scott Key Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
This figure’s creed ofsola  fide[fee-day] was inspired by Paul’s epistle to the Ephesians. This figure publicly burned a copy of the textExsurge  Domine[ex-oor-gaydoh-mee-nay] because it censured one of his works. This man claimed “Here I stand, I can do no other” when summoned by Pope Leo X[tenth] at the Diet of Worms in 1521. For ten points, name this Augustinian monk who nailed his 95 Theses onto the door of a Wittenberg church.	ANSWER: Martin Luther
Unit  2  of  a  facility  near  Harrisburg,  Pennsylvania  suffered  this  type  of  disaster  in  1979  when  a cooling  system  malfunctioned.  Detectors  in  Sweden  identified  that  one  of  these  disasters  took  place  in Soviet-controlled Ukraine in 1986, leaving behind an “exclusion zone” that is still off limits to humans. For ten points, name this type of disaster that took place at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl and resulted in the release of radiation.	ANSWER:nucleardisaster (accept anything related to nuclearmeltdown, etc.; accept descriptions of radiationbeing released into the air before mentioned)
This location was visited by the captain Garcia de Cardenas, who was led alongside the Moran Point by native guides. This site’s Eagle Rock is considered sacred by the Hualapai tribe, who live here alongside the Havasupai and manage a glass walkway 4,000 feet off the ground called the Skywalk. This site was created six million years ago by uplift along the Colorado River. For ten points, name this large natural canyon in Arizona.	ANSWER: GrandCanyon
Robert B. Randolph attempted to assassinate this man after he dismissed Randolph for embezzlement in  the  Navy.  Painter  Richard  Lawrence  misfired  two  pistols  in  another  attempted  assassination  of  this man, who dissolved the Second Bank of the United States after engaging in a “Bank War” with Nicholas Biddle. This signer of the Specie Circular was advised by the Kitchen Cabinet. For ten points, name this seventh US President who appears on the $20 bill.	ANSWER: Andrew Jackson
This country’s Decree 770 banned both abortion and contraception, leading to spikes in the birth rate and the population of orphans. A wave of protests after the eviction of the Hungarian pastor Laszlo Tokes [TUH-kesh] resulted in the overthrow of this country’s government in 1989; those protests led to the Christmas Day executions of Elena and Nicolae Ceausescu[cho-chess-koo]. For ten points, name this European country that experienced anti-Communist protests in Timisoara and Bucharest.	ANSWER: Romania Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
In  1863,  this  person  and  James  Montgomery  led  a  successful  raid  on  the  Combahee  River.  This abolitionist  was  nicknamed  by  William  Lloyd  Garrison  due  to  a  similarity  with  a  prophet  in  the  Book of  Exodus.  This  woman  helped  circumvent  the  Fugitive  Slave  Act  by  leading  expeditions  down  the Chesapeake  coast  of  Maryland.  For  ten  points,  name  this  former  slave,  known  as  “Moses,”  who  guided many escaped slaves to the North on the Underground Railroad.	ANSWER: Harriet Tubman
In a myth about this location, the Devil threw a rock at a friar, creating the “Friar’s Heel” about 100 feet from a “Slaughter Stone.” William Stukeley hypothesized that this site was used as a Druid place of worship. The sunset of the winter solstice aligns with this site, which is located on the Salisbury plain. For ten points, name this prehistoric monument of England, a ring of standing stones.	ANSWER: Stonehenge
A type of music native to this country features the five-string vihuela and the deep-bodied, low-pitched guitarron. A folk song with an uneven five-four rhythm about a legless arthropod became popular during this country’s revolution, with lyrics making fun of Victoriano Huerta sung by partisans of Pancho Villa. For  ten  points,  name  this  country  where  songs  like  “La  Cucaracha”  and  “La  Bamba”  are  played  by mariachi bands south of the United States.	ANSWER: Mexico(or theUnitedMexicanStatesorEstadosUnidosMexicanos)
During  his  first  Parliament,  this  man  confiscated  all  the  land  holdings  of  his  predecessor’s  wife, Elizabeth  Woodville.  Shortly  after  this  man  became  king,  the  children  Richard  of  Shrewsbury  and Edward V mysteriously disappeared after being taken to the Tower of London. This man’s remains had disappeared for centuries until, in 2012, they were found under a parking lot. For ten points, name this subject of a Shakespeare history, the final king of the House of York.	ANSWER: RichardIII
During this event, John Indian was ordered to prepare a cake made of urine to feed to a dog. Cotton Mather addressed a letter to the instigators of this event warning them against using “spectral evidence.” One part of this event focused on the slave Tituba’s alleged spiritual influence over young children. Twenty people died during the hysteria of, for ten points, what late 17th century tragedy in Massachusetts over supposed evil magic?	ANSWER: Salemwitchtrials(accept descriptive answers that mention all three aspects of the answer; prompt on partial answers) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
Immediately  prior  to  this  event,  a  character  delivers  a  monologue  in  which  he  argues  against  a pardon by stating “I am constant as the northern star.” A man justifies his involvement in this event by comparing its central subject to a serpent’s egg. The target of this event is eulogized in a funeral oration that begins “Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears.” For ten points, name this event in which a Roman leader utters the dying words “Et tu, Brute.”	ANSWER: assassination(ormurder,killing,stabbing, etc.) of JuliusCaesar
One  member  of  this  program  was  given  the  call  sign  “Chaika,”  or  “Seagull,”  and  completed  her intended action 48 times. The exclamation “poyekhali!” was made at the start of one of this program’s missions; that mission, which began at the Baikonur Cosmodrome, wasVostok 1and launched in 1961. Valentina  Tereshkova  and  Yuri  Gagarin  were  members  of,  for  ten  points,  what  Cold  War-era  program that, in 1957, launchedSputnikinto orbit?	ANSWER:SovietUnion’sspaceprogram  (orKosmicheskayaprogrammaSSSR;  acceptRussian spaceprogram; accept descriptive answers; prompt on partial answers)
This ruler overthrew the Chagatai Khanate after his capture of Balkh and defeated the leader of the Golden Horde, Tokhtamysh, at the Kur River. This man defeated the Tughluq Dynasty by setting camels on fire to scare elephants. This ruler brought back the spoils from his sacks of Damascus and Delhi to his capital  of  Samarkand.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Turkic  conqueror  of  Central  Asia  who  suffered  from  a limp.	ANSWER: Timurthe Lame (orTamerlane)
This politician used the slogan “in your guts you know he’s nuts” to mock his opponent’s campaign slogan; he also attacked that opponent with an advertisement featuring a girl picking at a daisy before a  nuclear  explosion.  This  President  signed  amendments  to  Social  Security  that  created  Medicare  and Medicaid, and he declared “War on Poverty” as part of his Great Society program. For ten points, name this Texan US president who succeeded John F. Kennedy.	ANSWER: Lyndon BainesJohnson(acceptLBJ; prompt on Johnson)
This politician attempted to stall the construction of the Hinckley nuclear power station out of fears of  Chinese  involvement.  This  figure  was  criticized  after  reportedly  covering  up  the  misfire  of  a  Trident missile  in  June  2016.  She  appointed  the  highly  controversial  Boris  Johnson  as  Secretary  of  State  for Foreign Affairs, and in March 2017 she invoked Article 50 to formally begin the Brexit process. For ten points, name this successor of David Cameron as prime minister of the United Kingdom.	ANSWER: Theresa May Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
This president’s Secretary of the Treasury, William McAdoo, closed the New York Stock Exchange for months to keep foreign money in the U.S. despite the outbreak of war. A coded message to Mexico sent by Arthur Zimmerman led this man to break a promise of neutrality that had won this man re-election. For ten points, name this President of the United States who was unable to convince the U.S. Senate to join the League of Nations after World War I.	ANSWER: Woodrow Wilson
In 1999, this country and its eastern neighbor established “Earthquake Diplomacy.” This country’s rapper  Killah  P  was  murdered  by  a  supporter  of  the  Golden  Dawn  Party.  In  2015,  there  was  high speculation  that  this  country  would  abandon  the  Euro.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Balkan  country, currently ruled by the SYRIZA Party under Alexis Tsipras, which has suffered from austerity and high unemployment in Athens.	ANSWER: Greece(orHellenicRepublic)
A complementary summary of this series,An Address to the People of the State of New York, was published shortly before it finished. George Clinton may have been one of the writers who used the pen names Brutus and Cato to counter these documents, which themselves were written under the pseudonym Publius. John Jay, James Madison, and Alexander Hamilton collaborated on, for ten points, what series of 85 essays written in 1787-88 to explain and defend the U.S. Constitution?	ANSWER: The FederalistPapers
This leader appointed Ian MacGregor as head of the National Coal Board, which closed unprofitable mines,  angering  Arthur  Scargill.  This  leader  narrowly  won  a  vote  of  no  confidence  to  depose  James Callaghan, and was succeeded by John Major after a cabinet minister resigned due to her combative style. This Prime Minister formed a friendship with Ronald Reagan and won the Falklands War. For ten points, name this Iron Lady, the first female Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.	ANSWER: Margaret Thatcher
This  composer’s  overture  toRienziwas  performed  at  every  Nuremburg  Rally.  This  man  attacked Felix Mendelssohn in the anti-Semitic tractOn Jewishness in Music. He used the term “music dramas” to describe his operas. King Ludwig II’s castle Neuschwanstein [noysh-vahn-stein] was inspired by the operas of this man, which are often performed at his opera house in Bayreuth[bye-royt]. For ten points, name this German composer ofLohengrinandThe Ring Cycle.	ANSWER: RichardWagner[vahg-ner] Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
Poor economic and human rights conditions, as well as this man’s affair with the thirteen-year old Nelly Rivas, led to his downfall in the 1955 Liberating Revolution. In 1973, disgruntled snipers opened fire  on  left-wing  supporters  of  this  man  at  the  Ezeiza  airport.  This  head  of  the  Justicialist  party  drew support from the descamisados and was succeeded by his third wife, Isabel, in 1974. For ten points, name this Argentine president and husband of Evita.	ANSWER: Juan Per ́on
Early discoveries of this item in America occurred at the Reed farm in North Carolina, and Dahlongea, Georgia.  In  the  aftermath  of  Executive  Order  6102,  the  US  built  a  storage  facility  for  this  item  near Elizabethtown, Kentucky. The slogan “Pike’s Peak or Bust!” was used by people who traveled to Colorado to mine this material. For ten points, what precious metal is stored in bullion form at Fort Knox and was found, with silver, in the Comstock Lode?	ANSWER:gold
During  a  military  campaign  in  this  modern-day  country,  a  failed  attack  on  Sari  Bair  began  with a  breakout  from  Anzac  Cove  and  cost  Winston  Churchill  his  job  as  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  The Gallipoli Campaign was fought against Mustafa Kemal’s forces in what is now this country. For ten points, name this country that gained its independence after the fall of the Ottoman Empire and is now ruled from Ankara.	ANSWER: Republic of Turkey
This city hosted Anthony Burns’ fugitive slave trial. William Lloyd Garrison published his newspaper The Liberatorfrom this city. An engraving by Paul Revere shows an attack led by Thomas Preston in this city; John Adams won the acquittal of the six attackers, who fired into a crowd, killing Crispus Attucks and  four  others.  For  ten  points,  name  this  New  England  city  where  British  soldiers  carried  out  a  1770 “massacre.”	ANSWER: Boston
A work about these people is divided into sections concerning “History,” “Psychology,” and “Biology” and argues that these people have become a passive “Other.” One philosopher distinguished these people from barbarians and the uneducated to argue for their suffrage. J.S. Mill wrote about theSubjection of, for ten points, name what group of people, the subjects of Simone Beauvoir’sThe Second Sex?	ANSWER:women(accept equivalents) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
This man advocated for a “priesthood of all believers” in the workTo the Christian Nobility of the German Nation. He was protected by Frederick the Wise after Charles V ordered his arrest. Pope Leo X excommunicated this man with the bullExsurge Domine[EX-ur-gayDOE-mee-nay] after he posted the 95 Theses. For ten points, name this German priest who began the Protestant Reformation.	ANSWER: MartinLuther
This nation was invaded by Huang Taiji in 1636 as the Qing [CHING] dynasty sought to solidify its war against the Ming. In 1592, Toyotomi Hideyoshi’s invasion of this nation was disrupted by enemy turtle ships. The Joseon dynasty ruled it until 1897, and it was annexed by Japan in 1910. For ten points, name this East Asian peninsula split after World War II by Soviet and American agreement into two countries with capitals Pyongyang and Seoul.	ANSWER: Korean Peninsula (accept Joseon Kingdom, Dynasty, or similar before mentioned)
Shoshone [sho-sho-nay] Falls and Twin Falls lie on this river, whose largest tributary is the Salmon River.  In  1974,  Evel  Knievel’s  Skycycle  X-2  nearly  jumped  a  canyon  of  this  tributary  of  the  Columbia River.  For  ten  points,  name  this  river  that  flows  through  Hells  Canyon  after  receiving  the  Boise  River near the border of Oregon and Idaho.	ANSWER:SnakeRiver
The rVSV-ZEBOV vaccine has been shown effective in treating this disease. Emile Ouamouno died six days after contracting this disease, and Eric Duncan infected two Americans with it. Liberia was declared free of this disease after 42 days with no new cases. For ten points, name this disease which caused a 2014 epidemic in West Africa.	ANSWER:Ebolavirus disease (orEbolahemorrhagic fever)
In the Hellenistic period, this deity was syncretized with Apis to form the god Serapis. The djed pillar represented the spine of this deity, whose wife searched throughout Egypt to find the 14 pieces of his body after he was torn apart by his jealous brother, Set. For ten points, name this Egyptian god of the afterlife whose consort was his sister, Isis.	ANSWER:Osiris
This  president’s  “New  Look”  policy  led  to  the  overthrow  of  Guatemalan  Jacobo  Arbenz.  This president overhauled the nation’s infrastructure with the National Interstate and Defense Highways Act. For  ten  points,  name  this  U.S.  President  who  won  the  1952  election  with  the  slogan  “I  like  Ike”  after leading American troops in Europe in World War II.	ANSWER: Dwight David Eisenhower Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 1
Neil Armstrong took a recording of theramin music and this man’s ninth symphony on Apollo 11. He wrote his twelfth string quartet while spending a summer in Spillville, Iowa, though hisSlavonic Dances honored Brahms and paid tribute to his native Bohemia. For ten points, name this Czech composer who, while visiting America, wrote his Symphony no. 9, “From the New World.”	ANSWER: AntoninDvorak
One artist from this country classified his work as “stabiles” and “mobiles,” one of which consists of aluminum fins suspended on steel wire. That artist from this country, Alexander Calder, also createdBent Propeller, which was destroyed when the Minoru Yamasaki-designed World Trade Center was attacked on 9/11. For ten points, name this country, home of the Museum of Modern Art in New York.	ANSWER: United States of America(acceptUSA or clear equivalents)
Supporters of this party were victims of the White Terror Massacre. The Xian[SHEE-ahn] incident was perpetrated by members of this party. The Gang of Four consisted of members of this party and were later found guilty of treason near the end of one of this party’s efforts, the Cultural Revolution. For ten points, name this ruling party of an Asian nation once led by Mao Zedong.	ANSWER:CommunistParty ofChina(orChineseCommunistParty; prompt on partial answers)
This organization founded the Bowen Country Club as a summer camp. Toynbee Hall inspired this institution, which was founded on Halsted Street by Ellen Gates Starr and the first American woman to win a Nobel Peace Prize. This organization started providing education and support to the poor in 1889. For ten points, name this settlement house in Chicago co-founded by Jane Addams.	ANSWER:HullHouse
Thenorthernhalfofthispeninsulawascontrolledinthe600sbyanExarchate [[EKS-ar-kate]]basedinRavenna.HannibalBarcacrossedtheAlpswithamercenaryarmy toraidthispeninsulawhichhostsseveralmicrostates,includingSanMarinoandVatican City.Fortenpoints,namethispeninsula,theformerhomeoftheEtruscancivilizationand the heart of the Roman Empire.	ANSWER:ItalianPeninsula (acceptItalicPeninsula;acceptApenninePeninsula before "Apennine" is mentioned; acceptItaly)
Thisleaderobtainedadoctorateinquantumchemistryin1986priortoentering politics.ThispoliticianplayedacentralroleinnegotiatingtheTreatyofLisbonandwasa mainfigurebehindthestimulusplantohelpsheltertheEuropeanUnionfromtheGreat Recession.TheleaderoftheChristianDemocraticUnionfrom2000to2018,thispolitician waselectedtoherhighestpositionin2005.Fortenpoints,namethisfirstfemalechancellor of Germany.	ANSWER: AngelaMerkel(or Angela DorotheaMerkel;accept Angela DorotheaKasner)
FriedrichMiescher[[MEE-shuh]]firstidentifiedthismoleculein1869,callingit nuclein.Helicasescreatea"fork"duringthereplicationofthismolecule,whosestructure wasidentifiedthankstoRosalindFranklin'sPhoto51.Fortenpoints,namethismolecule thatisoftensequenced,bestidentifiedbyitsdouble-helixstructuredocumentedbyWatson and Crick.	ANSWER:DNA(acceptDeoxyribonucleic acid)
ThismanorderedtheHungnamEvacuationfollowinghisfailuretopredictan invasionbythePeople'sVolunteerArmy.Thisman'sfailuretoabandonthestrategically insignificantsiteofPeleliu[[peh-LEH-loo]]resultedindevastatinglossesforU.S.marines. Thisman'ssupportoftheuseofnuclearweaponsintheKoreanWarledtohissackingby HarryS.Truman.Fortenpoints,namethisSupremeAlliedcommanderinthePacific Theater.	ANSWER: DouglasMacArthur  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 2
ThisrulercalledForeignMinisterNikitaPanina"personalencyclopedia,"though PaninfelloutoffavorbyadvocatingfortheNorthernAlliancewithPrussia.Toconvincethis empressthatthetypicalserffareswell,herloverandadvisorGrigoryPotemkinsupposedly showedherretinuefalsevillagesinCrimea.UponconversiontotheRussianOrthodox church,thenameYekaterinawasgivento,fortenpoints,whichRussianempressofthe18th century?	ANSWER:Catherinethe Great (acceptCatherineII;acceptYekaterinaII before mentioned)
The"PlanoftheThreeGuarantees"inthisnation'scityofIgualaestablisheda short-livedConstitutionalMonarchythere.Theransackingofaforeignchef'sshopledtothe FirstFrenchInterventioninthisnationduringthePastryWar.Thisnation'swarof independencebeganaftertheGritodeDoloresbyDonMiguelHidalgo.MuchofNewSpain wasmadeupof,fortenpoints,whatNorthAmericannationtothesouthoftheUnited States?	ANSWER: United States ofMexico(or Estados UnidosMexicanos; acceptEUM; accept First MexicanEmpire; accept FirstMexicanRepublic)
Thisone-timeMinisterofFrancerefusedtocondemntheReignofTerrorsayingit would"UnderminethecauseofrepublicanisminAmerica."WithJamesMadison,thisman sponsoredandwrotetheNationalGazettetoraisemoneyforhisagrarianparty.Forten points,namethisSecretaryofStateinthefirstpresidentialcabinet,therivalofAlexander Hamilton and principal author of the Declaration of Independence.	ANSWER: ThomasJefferson
IbnBattutaclaimedthatthisstructure'spurposewastokeepoutdemonicbeasts namedGogandMagog.Thefirstsectionsofthisstructurewerebelievedtohavebeenbuilt duringtheSpringandAutumnPeriod.TherebelLiZichengwasdefeatedbyacombined forceofManchusandGeneralWuSangui's[[SAHNG-GWEES]]loyalistsatthisstructure's namesakefortressintheBattleofShanhaiPass.Fortenpoints,namethisseriesof fortifications across northern China.	ANSWER:Great Wallof China (accept WanliChangcheng)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 2
AseriesofworkstitledAnti-[thiscollection]werewrittenbypoliticalfigures includingJohnDewittandGeorgeClinton.Both"checksandbalances"and"separationof powers"areadvocatedforinthe51stpieceofthiscollection,whichalsostatesthe legislativebranchisthetruevoiceofthepeople.Thename"Publius"wasusedbyMadison, Hamilton,andJaytowrite,fortenpoints,whatcollectionofessayssupportingthe ratification of the U.S. Constitution?	ANSWER:TheFederalistPapers(orTheFederalist;the full title isTheFederalist: A Collection of Essays, Written in Favour of the New Constitution, as Agreed upon by the Federal Convention, September 17, 1787)
InIslam,thisbookisidentifiedwithapre-IslamicholybooktitledZabur.Portionsof thisbooklabelledmizmorwereoriginallyintendedtobesung.Manysectionsofthisbook areattributedtoAsaphandtheSonsofKorah.The23rdchapterofthisbookbeginswiththe line"TheLordismyshepherd,Ishallnotwant."Fortenpoints,namethisOldTestament book that contains many poems attributed to King David.	ANSWER: Book ofPsalms(or ThePsalter; acceptTehillim)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 2
One side at this battle failed to penetrate earthworks along the Rodriguez Canal, suffering over two thousand  casualties  to  the  Americans’  seventy-one.  British  general  Edward  Pakenham  was  killed  while Jean Lafitte assisted the victors in this battle, fought two weeks after the signing of the Treaty of Ghent that ended the War of 1812. For ten points, name this military victory for Andrew Jackson, which took place outside a large city in Louisiana.	ANSWER: Battle of NewOrleans
One of this country’s colonies, named Port Royal, was captured by the British in 1710, leading to the Great Expulsion of people from this country to regions farther south. This country chose to keep its sugar-producing colonies of Guadeloupe and Martinique instead of much of their territory in continental North America that included Upper Canada. For ten points, name this country that, after fighting Great Britain in the Seven Years War, ceded its colony of Quebec.	ANSWER: France(orFrenchEmpire)
The  name  of  this  body  was  conceived  by  11-year  old  Venetia  Burney  and  announced  in  1930. Though Percival Lowell initially predicted this body’s existence, Clyde Tombaugh discovered it using an astrograph. Photographs of this body from 12,500 kilometers were taken by the New Horizons space probe in July 2015. For ten points, name this body that was the smallest planet in our solar system prior to its controversial reclassification as a dwarf planet in 2006.	ANSWER: Pluto
This man was forced to duel Humphrey Marshall after proposing a law that banned British cloth in favor of homespun cloth. This man argued with Andrew Jackson over the funding of the Maysville Road as part of the American System. They feuded again when this Speaker of the House awarded the Election of 1824 to John Quincy Adams as part of a “corrupt bargain.” For ten points, name this Kentucky senator, known as the “Great Compromiser.”	ANSWER: Henry Clay
This  dynasty  was  founded  by  an  emperor  who  established  a  secret  police  force  known  as  the Embroidered  Uniform  Guard.  That  emperor’s  grandson  died  at  the  hands  of  his  uncle,  Zhu  Di,  who became the Yongle [yong-luh] Emperor. The Yongle Emperor employed the eunuch Zheng He[zhung-huh] to command his treasure fleet and successfully spread Chinese influence as far as the Persian Gulf. For ten points, name this Chinese dynasty that ruled from 1368 to 1644, perhaps best known today for its fine ceramics.	ANSWER:MingDynasty Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 2
This  Englishman’s  belief  that  government  must  maintain  “life,  liberty,  and  estate”  was  echoed  by Thomas  Jefferson.  He  believed  that  the  mind  was  born  without  any  pre-established  ideas,  his  “tabula rasa.” That  concept was discussed inAn Essay Concerning Human Understanding. He’s  not Rousseau, but  this  philosopher  argued  for  a  social  contract  in  another  of  his  most  famous  works.  For  ten  points, name this philosopher and author ofTwo Treatises of Government.	ANSWER: John Locke
Arrivals at this place were asked a series of questions, controversially including the amount of money they carried, and the National Origins Act of 1924 imposed race-based quotas on the operations of this place. By the time this place closed in 1954, over 12 million people had passed through it. For ten points, identify  this  New  York  island  which  during  the  first  half  of  the  20th  century  was  the  U.S.’s  busiest immigrant inspection port.	ANSWER: EllisIsland
A Velazquez painting of this figure was attacked by suffragette Mary Richardson. A faceless depiction of this figure was discovered in 1908 by Joseph Szombathy in the village of Willendorf. In another painting, this  figure  is  blown  to  shore  by  Zephyrus  and  stands  on  a  giant  shell.  An  armless  statue  discovered  on the island of Milos depicts, for ten points, what goddess whose birth is depicted in a painting by Sandro Botticelli?	ANSWER:Venus(acceptAphrodite; acceptVenusof Willendorf, RokebyVenus,Venusde Milo, or Birth ofVenus)
This ruler’s navy fought off one attack by using fireships to thwart enemies at the battle of Gravelines [grav-LEEN]. One of this ruler’s admirals launched a daring raid on Cadiz, boasting he had “singed the beard” of a rival king. This patron of Francis Drake gave the Tilbury speech, where this ruler declared she had the “heart and stomach of a king” in the face of invasion from the Spanish Armada. For ten points, name this daughter of Henry VIII, the “virgin queen” of England.	ANSWER: ElizabethI
Girolamo Frescobaldi and Jean Lully Batiste were composers from the early part of this period. This period of music was significant for ushering in the transition from modal to tonal styles, and music from this period tended to be dense and complex, forming a polyphony of voices through arrangements such as the fugue. For ten points, identify this period of music named after the Portuguese word for “misshapen pearl,” lasting from roughly 1600-1750 and including notable composers such as Bach and Handel.	ANSWER: Baroque Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 2
Supporters of this legislation organized the “Prison Special” in which members of the Silent Sentinels traveled  from  city  to  city  giving  speeches.  In  a  speech  supporting  this  legislation,  Woodrow  Wilson asked if a certain group should only have “suffering and sacrifice” without “privilege and right.” Carrie Chapman Catt and Alice Paul rallied the NAWSA in support of this amendment. For ten points, name this amendment that gave women the right to vote.	ANSWER: 19th Amendment
A president of this country tried to avoid the ramifications of the Rywingate corruption scandal by claiming  parliamentary  commissions  couldn’t  investigate  him.  The  President  of  the  European  Council, Donald  Tusk,  was  Prime  Minister  of  this  country  during  the  early  2010s.  A  trade  union  founded  in this  country’s  Lenin  Shipyards  in  1980  was  led  by  electrician  and  future  President  Lech  Walesa [lek vah-WEN-sah].  For  ten  points,  name  this  eastern  European  country  where  Solidarity  rose  to  power  in Warsaw.	ANSWER: Poland
A character in this novel declares a wish to become a vivandi`ere in the Union Army to join her father, Robert, before he is wounded in 1862. John Brooke is also wounded in the Civil War and, with one of this  novel’s  title  characters,  becomes  the  father  of  twins  Daisy  and  Demi.  Professor  Bhaer  and  Laurie Laurence marry two of the other March sisters in, for ten points, what novel by Louisa May Alcott about Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy?	ANSWER: LittleWomen
This  city  established  a  foothold  in  the  Middle  East  after  signing  the  Pactum  Warmundi  with Jerusalem. Julius II formed the League of Cambrai to combat the influence of this city. This city secured its influence in the Mediterranean following the War of Chioggia. This city was governed by a Council of Ten led by a Doge. For ten points, name this rival of Genoa, an Italian city-state known for its canals.	ANSWER:Venice
A territory governed by this country contains the island of Saipan and is governed from the town of Capitol Hill. UN Security Council Resolution 21 gave this country the Northern Mariana Islands. During the Spanish Flu epidemic, John Martin Poyer quarantined an island territory of this country and its bay at Pago Pago. A portion of Samoa is governed by, for ten points, what country whose Pacific holdings also include Guam and Hawaii?	ANSWER: UnitedStatesof America (orAmerica; acceptUSA) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
During this man’s presidency, the Insanity Defense Reform Act shifted the burden of proof for insanity defenses from the prosecution to the defense. This man’s press secretary, James Brady, received wounds that contributed to his death 33 years later when, due to his fixation on Jodie Foster, John Hinckley Jr. fired  six  shots  at  this  man.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Republican  President  who  was  the  target  of  an assassination attempt in 1981.	ANSWER: Ronald Reagan
Jamala  won  this  event  in  2016  by  protesting  the  treatment  of  the  Crimean  Tatars  in  1944.  This event’s scoring reform in 2016 allowed participating countries to score twice as many “douze points”[dooz pwant] as before. This event was created in 1956 as an effort to popularize live TV throughout Western Europe.  Australia  is  a  guest  competitor  in,  for  ten  points,  what  annual  international  song  competition that was won in 2019 by the Netherlands?	ANSWER:EurovisionSong Contest
In this country, a 90-day state of emergency edict was continually renewed by Alfred Stroessner for over 30 years. This country’s leader, Francisco Solano Lopez, died at the Battle of Cerro Cor ́a near the end of the War of the Triple Alliance. This country defended the nearby Republic of Uruguay after it was invaded by Pedro II. For ten points, name this country where Brazilian forces occupied Asuncio ́n at the end of a 1864 war.	ANSWER: Paraguay
This woman was abducted after being tricked into boarding Samuel Argall’s ship. Alexander Whitaker converted this woman to Christianity and oversaw her baptism, upon which she took the name Rebecca. With  Tomocomo,  this  woman  traveled  to  England  with  her  husband  John  Rolfe.  This  daughter  of Powhatan legendarily stopped the execution of an English colonist by placing her head over his body. For ten points, name this Native American woman who may have saved John Smith.	ANSWER: Pocahontas(accept RebeccaRolfebefore “Rolfe” is read)
This  ruler  was  served  by  “spymaster”  Francis  Walsingham,  who  was  succeeded  by  Robert  Cecil. Following  the  Battle  of  Gravelines,  this  ruler  addressed  troops  at  Tilbury,  claiming  she  had  the  “heart and  stomach  of  a  king.”  This  queen  reinstated  the  Act  of  Supremacy  which  had  been  repealed  as  part of the Catholic reforms of Mary I. For ten points, name this “Virgin Queen,” the last Tudor monarch of England.	ANSWER:ElizabethI(prompt on Elizabeth) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
This group was the first target of Justinian’s reconquest wars. These people, along with the Alans, were led by Genseric. These people captured Carthage in 439 AD, making it the capital of their North African  empire.  Pope  Leo  I  was  able  to  limit,  but  not  stop,  these  people’s  455  sack  of  Rome.  For  ten points,  name  this  Germanic  tribe  whose  name  has  become  synonymous  with  defacing  and  destroying property.	ANSWER: Vandals
In one scheme, this man attempted to negotiate a secret rebate with railroad companies by creating the South Improvement Company. A company founded by this man was subject of a muckraking expose by  Ida  Tarbell.  This  man  grew  his  business  through  horizontal  integration  after  establishing  a  series  of refineries in Ohio, but his flagship company was eventually broken up by the Supreme Court in 1911. For ten points, name this founder of the Standard Oil company.	ANSWER: John D. Rockefeller
In 2012, this country temporarily occupied the Heglig oil field of its northern neighbor. The President of this country has been known for his fondness for Stetson hats since he received one as a gift from George W. Bush in 2006. Civil war broke out in this country in 2013 shortly after Riek Machar was accused of plotting a coup d’etat by President Salva Kiir. For ten points, name this African country that declared its independence in 2011.	ANSWER: Republic of SouthSudan(do not accept or prompt on Sudan alone)
One holder of this position, John Lindsay, switched parties to mount a failed bid for the Democratic nomination for President in 1972. Norman Mailer ran on an Existentialist Party ticket for this office. This office’s occupants, including Fernando Wood, were often controlled by “Boss” Tweed and his Tammany Hall organization. For ten points, name this office held in more recent years by Rudy Giuliani, Michael Bloomberg, and Bill de Blasio.	ANSWER: MayorofNewYorkCity (acceptMayorofNYC)
Azizul Haque and Hem Chandra Bose subdivided these objects into 1024 types to develop the Henry Classification System of sorting them. Excavating pottery in Japan piqued Henry Fauld’s interest in these objects. Marcello Malpighi documented friction ridges in these structures, which Francis Galton divided into loops, arches, and whorls. For ten points, forensic science studies the identification of what patterns that are unique to every human and often left at crime scenes?	ANSWER: fingerprints Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 2
A series ofReflections onthis period were written by Edmund Burke. During this period, the seating arrangements in the National Assembly gave rise to the modern left-right political spectrum. This period led to the execution of thousands of Monarchists and Girondins during the Reign of Terror. Maximilien Robespierre came to prominence during, for ten points, what period of French history that toppled the monarchy?	ANSWER: FrenchRevolution
This  man  described  the  Missouri  Compromise  as  a  “firebell  in  the  night”  and  “deathknell  to  the Union.” After the USSPhiladelphiawas captured, this president started America’s first foreign-declared conflict, the First Barbary War. To protect American shipping from the British and French navies, this man signed the Embargo Act. The first man to win a Presidential election as a Democratic-Republican was, for ten points, what third President of the US?	ANSWER: ThomasJefferson
This leader, who introduced the aureus, is the subject of a lifesize marble sculpture found in Prima Porta in 1863. The Ara Pacis shows this leader in triumphal procession. This leader adopted the title of divi  filiusafter gaining power 17 years after the murder of Julius Caesar. Along with Marc Antony and Lepidus, he formed the Second Triumvirate. For ten points, name this first emperor of Rome.	ANSWER: AugustusCaesar  (orOctavian;  accept  Gaius  Julius  CaesarAugustus;  accept  Gaius OctaviusThurinus; prompt on Caesar; do not prompt on Julius Caesar)
A  banker  and  a  judge  who  helped  draft  this  treaty  were  nicknamed  the  “heavenly  twins.”  Polish pianist Ignacy Paderewski served as a delegate to this treaty, which left the status of the Teschen district unresolved  and  demanded  the  transfer  of  the  regions  of  Eupen-Malmedy  and  Saar.  This  treaty  was supervised by the “Big Four”, including Vittorio Orlando, Georges Clemenceau, and David Lloyd George. For ten points, name this peace treaty with Germany that ended World War I.	ANSWER: Treaty of Versailles
On  his  way  to  this  landmark,  Umberto  Nobile,  the  pilot  of  the  airshipItalia,  crashed  and  was rescued by an international effort. Frederic Cook claimed to have reached this landmark before the person commonly known as its discoverer. The most famous expedition to this landmark was co-led by Matthew Henson and reached it in 1909. For ten points, name this landmark first reached by Captain Robert Peary, who traveled with several Inuit guides.	ANSWER:NorthPole Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 2
This  novel’s  reputation  increased  when  it  was  assigned  as  required  reading  by  David  Riesman  in a  sociology  class  shortly  after  its  publication.  Shortly  after  this  novel  was  picked  up  by  a  Book  of  the Month club, its author moved from his New York City apartment to his longtime home in Cornish, New Hampshire. Mark David Chapman bought a copy of this book the day that he killed John Lennon. For ten points, name this novel about the rebellious teen Holden Caulfield by J.D. Salinger.	ANSWER: The CatcherintheRye
Parson Brownlow was a vocal opponent of joining this group, using hisKnoxville Whignewspaper to oppose it. Cotton imports from India and Egypt allowed the United Kingdom to refuse to recognize this group, which employed A. P. Hill and George Pickett in its armed forces. Alexander Hamilton Stephens served as vice-president of, for ten points, what unrecognized nation whose only president, Jefferson Davis, resided in Richmond, Virginia?	ANSWER: ConfederateStates of America (accept word forms, like theConfederacy; accept theCSA)
Philip the Good ordered the construction of one of these objects called Mons Meg. An early metal version of these objects was called thepot-de-fer, and culverins were portable types of these items. The Hungarian  engineer  Orban  designed  a  massive  one  of  these  objects  that  malfunctioned  and  killed  him. Vauban designed star forts to defend against these weapons, which Mehmed II used to destroy the walls of Constantinople in 1453. For ten points, name these gunpowder-based artillery pieces.	ANSWER: cannons (orbombards; prompt on artillery before mentioned; prompt on supergun; do not prompt on gun, weapon, or other too-vague terms)
In 2004 in this country, TV host Rania al-Baz was severely beaten by her husband for answering the phone without permission. This country’s prominent businesswomen include Lubna Olayan, who gave a historic address in 2004 at the Jeddah Economic Forum, held on this country’s west coast. For ten points, name this country where, in 2017, King Salman lifted a restriction on driver’s licenses that will, eventually, allow women to drive in Riyadh and Mecca.	ANSWER: Kingdom of SaudiArabia
This organization was investigated by the Kefauver Committee, which failed to prove its existence. Six years later, dozens of members of this organization fled into the forest around Joseph Barbara’s house in Apalachin, New York, after a meeting called there by Vito Genovese was raided by police. The “Five Families,” including the Gambino family, were central to, for ten points, what Italian-American organized crime outfit?	ANSWER: the American mafia(accept LaCosaNostraorLCN; prompt on the mob) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
This  artist,  who  was  credited  as  Charlie  Jr.  in  the  Traveling  Wilburys,  is  the  subject  of  a  2007 documentary by Peter Bogdanovich,Running Down a Dream. In 2015, Jeff Lynne and this artist received royalties  from  Sam  Smith,  whose  “Stay  With  Me”  accidentally  plagiarized  this  man’s  “I  Won’t  Back Down.” For ten points, name this artist who sang songs like “American Girl” and “Free Fallin’” with his backing band, the Heartbreakers, and who passed away in October 2017.	ANSWER: Tom Petty
Pliny  the  Younger  wrote  a  letter  to  Trajan  concerning  the  treatment  of  these  people,  the  earliest reference to these people that wasn’t written by one of them. These people built elaborate catacombs to bury their dead and were blamed for a Great Fire by Nero. As a prelude to gladiatorial competitions, these people were forced to fight animals in the arena. For ten points, name these people who were persecuted in the Roman Empire for their worship of Jesus.	ANSWER: RomanChristians(prompt on Roman pagans; prompt on Romans until “wasn’t written by one of them” is read)
Two answers required. A conflict between these two countries was sparked by the destruction of a bakery  owned  by  a  man  named  Remontel.  Maximilian  I  was  installed  by  one  of  these  countries  on  the throne of the other. Ignacio Zaragoza led one of these two countries in victory against the other at the Battle of Puebla, which is commemorated by Cinco de Mayo. For ten points, name these two countries that clashed under leaders like Porfirio Diaz and Napoleon III.	ANSWER: MexicoandFrance(prompt on partial answers)
During  the  Civil  War,  a  member  of  this  family  served  as  US  Ambassador  to  the  UK.  That  man, Charles  Francis,  was  the  son  of  a  member  of  this  family  who  was  the  first  US  Minister  to  Russia  and negotiated an 1819 treaty over the rights to Florida with Luis de Onis of Spain. That man, James Monroe’s Secretary of State, became the second member of this family to become president. For ten points, name this family of John and John Quincy, the 2nd and 6th US Presidents.	ANSWER: Adamsfamily
One  of  this  man’s  works  was  compiled  by  Tribonian,  John  the  Cappadocian,  and  others.  A disagreement  at  chariot  races  during  his  reign  grew  into  the  Nika  Riots,  which  he  put  down  at  the encouragement  of  his  wife  Theodora.  This  ruler’s  general  Belisarius  recaptured  Northern  Africa  and much of Italy, and this man codified Roman law into theCorpus Juris Civilis. For ten points, name this Byzantine emperor who built the Hagia Sophia.	ANSWER: Justinianthe Great (orJustinianI) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
Buckley v. Valeoused this amendment to overturn the Federal Election Campaign Act.Chaplinksky v. New Hampshireunanimously declared that “fighting words” did not apply under this amendment. The Supreme Court’s requirement that “actual malice” be involved in libelous pieces was the basis for their ruling  inNew York Times v. Sullivan.  For  ten  points,  name  this  U.S.  Constitutional  amendment  that protects free speech and free press.	ANSWER: 1st Amendment
For many years, Ohio Congressman Ralph Regula blocked attempts to rename this landmark, which is normally climbed by the West Buttress Route. Gold prospector William Dickey coined a name for this peak; in 2015, that name was officially replaced by its local Athabascan name, translating to “the high one.” For ten points, name this highest peak in North America, an Alaska mountain that was previously named Mount McKinley.	ANSWER: Denali(accept MountMcKinleybefore mentioned)
The Fuller Syndicate invested in these systems as part of the Gould system. The Gadsden Purchase was  completed  to  obtain  good  land  for  one  these  systems.  Acts  passed  in  1862  and  1863  created  land grants and set a uniform gauge for these systems, one of which was finished at Promontory, Utah with a golden spike. The Union Pacific and Central Pacific collaborated on the first of, for ten points, what 19th century construction projects that allowed quick transport across the U.S.?	ANSWER: transcontinentalrailroad(prompt on partial answers)
Bill Gates distributed pages of this man’s Codex Leicester[lester] as a Windows screen saver. This man wrote in reverse cursive in notebooks detailing water-walking shoes and an early helicopter design, and he superimposed two images of a man inscribed in a circle and square in hisVitruvian Mandrawing. For  ten  points,  name  this  Italian  Renaissance  scientist  and  artist,  whose  non-journal  works  include  the Mona Lisa.	ANSWER: LeonardodaVinci(accept either underlined name)
This  man  included  two  breakstrains  in  a  piece  written  to  honor  a  National  Guard  regiment,The Gallant Seventh. He rejoined the military at the age of sixty-two when the US entered World War I and developed a namesake variant of the tuba that wraps around the player. This leader of the US Marine Band  wrote  the  “Liberty  Bell”  and  a  march  to  honor  the  American  flag.  For  ten  points,  name  this composer of the “Stars and Stripes Forever,” known as the “March King.”	ANSWER: John Philip Sousa Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
In 2009, one  of these awards was  controversially  awarded just  nine months into its recipient’s  first term. In granting this award in 2002 to a philanthropist who worked with Habitat for Humanity, Gunnar Berge[BAIR-ye] contrasted the winner with George W. Bush. U.S. Presidents Teddy Roosevelt, Jimmy Carter, and Barack Obama have each won, for ten points, what award for global social progress awarded by a Norwegian committee?	ANSWER: NobelPeacePrize (prompt on Nobel (Prize))
After  a  war  with  the  Ottomans,  this  empire  annexed  Bessarabia  and  supported  the  founding  of independent  Bulgaria.  This  empire  annexed  Khiva  and  Bukhara  during  the  “Great  Game”  with  the United Kingdom. In 1825, a succession crisis in this empire led to the Decembrist uprising of soldiers who supported Grand Duke Constantine, who instead remained in Poland. For ten points, name this empire that, in the 19th century, was led by three Alexanders from the Romanov family.	ANSWER:Russian Empire
This  country  received  illegal  kickbacks  from  the  Australian  Wheat  Board  through  the  UN’s  “Oil for  Food”  program,  which  bypassed  economic  sanctions  that  were  established  in  1991.  Hans  Blix  led  a 2002 commission that investigated this country’s weapons development program; it found no evidence of weapons of mass destruction, contradicting George W. Bush’s claims. For ten points, name this Middle Eastern country where, in 2003, a US-led coalition invaded and deposed its leader, Saddam Hussein.	ANSWER: Iraq
In this work, the fourth ditch of the Malebolge[mall-uh-bowlj] is home to sorcerers who walk with their heads turned backwards. This poem’s narrator avoids a leopard, a lion, and a wolf by passing through a doorway that warns, “abandon all hope, ye who enter here,” and later discovers the traitors Cassius, Brutus, and Judas writhing in the mouths of Lucifer. The poet Virgil guides the narrator during, for ten points, what first section of Dante’sDivine Comedy, in which the author explores the circles of Hell?	ANSWER: Inferno(prompt on Divine Comedy before mentioned)
A group that performed this action in 19th century New York, called the “Big Six,” used a symbolic Bengal tiger that was adopted by Boss Tweed. Marcus Licinius Crassus led a Roman group that refused to  perform  this  action  if  the  customers  refused  to  pay,  after  which  he  often  purchased  the  ruins.  In Philadelphia, Ben Franklin organized a “bucket brigade” to perform this action. For ten points, name this public service provided by professional groups like the FDNY in New York, which protect structures from combustive destruction.	ANSWER:firefighting(accept  clear  equivalents;  prompt  on  broader  descriptions,  like  “emergency services” or “first responders;” do not accept police or medical occupations) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
This  man  appointed  George  Creel  to  head  the  Committee  on  Public  Information,  a  propaganda machine. He attacked those who “poured the poison of disloyalty” in a State of the Union address, but was unable to get a press-censorship clause in the Espionage Act. For ten points, name this President who reneged  on  a  campaign  promise  to  “keep  us  out  of  the  War”  by  committing  American  forces  to  World War I.	ANSWER: Woodrow Wilson
In  this  novel,  a  “resurrection  man”  emerges  from  the  mists  in  front  of  a  mail  coach.  John  Barsad plants evidence on a man who is a lookalike of a drunken lawyer; that man ends this novel by saying “it is a far, far better rest that I go to than I have ever known” at the guillotine. French nobleman Marquis St. Evremonde is the uncle of Charles Darnay in, for ten points, what novel by Charles Dickens set during the French Revolution?	ANSWER: A TaleofTwoCities
During  this  battle,  General  Howe  lost  many  of  his  officers,  including  John  Pitcairn.  According  to legend, someone during this battle gave the order “Don’t shoot until you see the whites of their eyes.” Joseph Warren was killed at, for ten points, what Revolutionary War battle outside Boston that, despite its name, mostly took place on Breed’s Hill?	ANSWER: Battle of BunkerHill
This person’s life savings were swindled by two men who claimed to have gold from a distant relative. This spy for the Union during the Raid on Combahee Ferry had biographies written by Sarah Hopkins Bradford, which described her navigating a network of tunnels and safehouses. For ten points, name this abolitionist who escorted slaves as they escaped on the Underground Railroad.	ANSWER: Harriet Tubman
This figure was guarded by a group of horsemen called the Celeres, and he may be associated with the war god Quirinus because of his disappearance near the Quirinal Hill. He proclaimed “so perish every one hereafter that will leap over my wall” while killing his brother after they debated the meaning of the number of birds flying around their heads. For ten points, name this brother of Remus, the first king of the Romans.	ANSWER: Romulus
This  man  “smelt  a  rat  in  Philadelphia”  and  refused  to  attend  the  Constitutional  Convention.  In one  speech,  he  said  “Caesar  had  his  Brutus,  Charles  his  Cromwell”  to  the  House  of  Burgesses  over  his opposition to the Stamp Act, and his most famous speech occurred at St. John’s Church in a debate on sending troops during the American Revolution. For ten points, name this American founding father who proclaimed “Give me liberty or give me death!”	ANSWER: Patrick Henry Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 2
The Yaghan people are native to this island chain. Its largest city of Ushuaia[oosh-WHY-uh] was established as a penal colony and is served by the End of the World Train. The Drake Passage lies south of this island chain, and far fewer ships rounded its Cape Horn after the opening of the Panama Canal. For ten points, name this archipelago shared between Chile and Argentina on the southern tip of South America, whose Spanish name translates as “land of fire.”	ANSWER: TierradelFuego
In 2003, a copy of this painting was covered by a blue curtain while Colin Powell addressed the United Nations. On the left side of this painting, a bull stands over a woman who is holding her dead child. An eye-shaped light bulb explodes in this painting above an impaled, screaming horse. For ten points, name this painting inspired by the bombing of the title Basque town, a massive painting by Pablo Picasso.	ANSWER:Guernica
This man directed a 2005 film where he played Fred Friendly, a colleague of Edward Murrow, as well as a 2014 film about the recovery of art in Nazi Germany. This director ofGood Night and Good Luck andThe Monuments Menoperates a project to monitor Sudanese war crimes via satellite imagery. For ten  points,  name  this  American  actor  who  starred  as  Daniel  Ocean  in  theOcean’s 11trilogy  and  with Sandra Bullock in 2013’sGravity.	ANSWER: George Clooney
This ruler attempted to establish the Kingdom of Livonia as a vassal state, and this ruler established his  country’s  first  printing  press  at  Kitai-gorod.  This  ruler  conquered  Kazan  and  Astrakhan,  and  he established a secret police force known as the Oprichniki. Feodor I succeeded this ruler after he killed his eldest son in a fit of rage, eventually leading to the Time of Troubles. For ten points, name this first Tsar of Russia whose epithet notes his power, not his cruelty.	ANSWER:IvanIVof Russia [orIvantheTerrible; orIvanGrozny]
ThisU.S.immigrant'searlyventuresincludedinvestmentsinAdamsExpressandthe foundingoftheKeystoneBridgeCompany.AftersellinghislargestcompanytoJ.P.Morgan, thisauthorofthe"GospelofWealth"createdanamesakefoundationtoestablishlibraries andresearchcouncils.Makingmostofhiswealthasasteelmagnate,fortenpoints,what Scottish-born American philanthropist built an eponymous concert hall in New York City?	ANSWER: AndrewCarnegie
CavepaintingsintheAcacus[[ah-KAH-kus]]Mountainsindicatethisdesertmay onlyhaveformedafterthelastIceAge.TheTibestimountainslieinthisdesert,whichin recentdecadeshasadvancedsouthintotheSahel[[sah-HEEL]].Peoplesincludingthe BerbersandtheTuareg[[TWAH-reg]]ledgoldandsaltcaravansacrossthisdesert. HistoricallycrossedbyBedouincaravans,fortenpoints,whatisthismassivedesertin northern Africa?	ANSWER:Sahara Desert (or aṣ-ṣaḥrāʼ al-kubrá)
Thiswoman'sactionsatWerowocomoco[[way-ruh-wah-KOH-muh-koh]]are detailedinalettertoQueenAnneofDenmark.ThiswomandiedaftertravellingtoEngland withherhusband,JohnRolfe,tenyearsaftersheintervenedinanexecutionorderedbyher father,thePowhatan[[POW-uh-tan]]chief.Fortenpoints,namethisNativeAmerican "princess" who supposedly saved the life of John Smith during the first year of Jamestown.	ANSWER:Pocahontas(acceptMatoaka; accept RebeccaRolfebefore "Rolfe" is mentioned)
Thisstructure's"Robber'sTunnel"waslikelyresealedduringtheRamesside Restoration,oneofmanyancientsitesrefurbishedbythesittinggovernment.Atthefootof thisstructureisapreservedsolarbarque[[BARK]]knownasKhufu'sShip.Firstbuiltinthe 26thCenturyBC,thisbuildingstoodasthetalleststructureintheworlduntilthe constructionoftheLincolnCathedralin1311.Fortenpoints,namethisEgyptiantomband "Ancient Wonder of the World."	ANSWER:Great Pyramidof Giza (acceptPyramidofKhufu;orPyramidofCheops)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 3
DuringOperationIskra,KirillMeretskov[[meh-RET-skof]]conductedaneffortto openthiscitytoasupplyrouteknownasthe"RoadofLife."InconjunctionwithFinland, NaziGermany'sArmyGroupNorthbesiegedthiscityfortwoandhalfyearsduringWorld WarTwo.TheoutbreakofWorldWarOneledtothiscitybeingrenamedPetrograd.The HermitageandWinterPalacearein,fortenpoints,whatone-timecapitalofImperial Russia?	ANSWER:St. Petersburg(orLeningrad; acceptPetrogradbefore mentioned)
Duringthisconflict,theTheSun'sheadline"Gotcha"causedcontroversyfor downplayingitscasualties.OperationRosario,orderedbyLeopoldoGaltieri [[gahl-TYEH-ree]],beganthiswar,whichincludedanengagementbetweentheGeneral BelgranoandtheHMSConqueror.MargaretThatcherandherWarCabinetquickly recapturedSouthGeorgiaduringthisconflict.TheUKandArgentinaviedforcontrolofa namesake Atlantic archipelago in, for ten points, what ten-week war in 1982?	ANSWER:Falklands Wars (accept War of theFalklandIslands; accept La Guerra de las Malvinas)
AmemberofthisreligioussectnamedAlicePaulservedaspresidentoftheNational Women'sParty.TheonlyU.S.presidenttofollowthisdenomination'steachingswasRichard Nixon.Thissect'spersecutioninEnglandledWilliamPenntorequestthatJamesIIgivehim andhisfollowerslandintheNewWorld.Fortenpoints,namethispacifistChristiansect more formally known as the Society of Friends.	ANSWER:Quakers (accept Society ofFriendsbeforementioned; prompt on "Christianity")
ThispoliticianopenlycriticizedfellowpartymemberJoeManchinforusingtheterm "younglady"whilerefutingherclaimsonhislackoftransparencyinnegotiatingwithoil lobbyists.Thiscongresswoman,whoworeadressemblazonedwiththewords"Taxthe Rich"tothe2021MetGala,istheyoungestwomantotakeaseatintheHouseof Representatives,attheageof29.Fortenpoints,namethisPuertoRican-descendedNew York Representative sometimes known by her initials AOC.	ANSWER: AlexandriaOcasio-Cortez(acceptAOCbeforementioned; prompt on partial answers)
Thismusician,whoembarkedontheNeverEndingTourin1988,releasedthe1979 albumSlowTrainComingfollowinghisconversiontoEvangelicalChristianity.Thisartist included"AHardRain'sa-GonnaFall"onhisseminalalbumtitledTheFreewheelin'[this artist].Theauthorofsuchfolkhitsas"TheTimesTheyArea-Changin'"and"Blowin'inthe Wind," for ten points, who is this winner of the 2016 Nobel Prize in Literature?	ANSWER: BobDylan(accept RobertDylan; accept RobertAllenZimmerman)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 3
Apro-clericbranchofthisideologyknownasIntegralismattemptedtooverthrow Getulio[[zheh-TOO-lyoh]]VargasduringtheGuanabaraattackinBrazil.MPOswaldMosely ledaBritishUnionofthisideology,whichplummetedinpopularityfollowingtheNightof theLongKnives.TheFalangist[[fah-LAHN-jist]]partyofSpainfollowedthisideology. "NationalSocialism"inGermanywasasubsetof,fortenpoints,whatnebulously-defined radical far-right ideology, popular in the Interwar years?	ANSWER:Fascism(acceptFascists; prompt on "Nazism"or wordforms; acceptIntegralism before mentioned)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 3
Under  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  John  Maynard  Woodworth  was  the  first  holder  of  this  position.  While Thomas  Parran  held  this  position,  one  of  his  divisions  controversially  conducted  an  experiment  at Tuskegee University to test African-Americans with syphilis treatments. C. Everett Coop sent out AIDS information documents to all U.S. households while holding this cabinet level position that holds a 3-star rank. For ten points, name this position that oversees American public health.	ANSWER: SurgeonGeneralof the United States
Two  answers  required:  One  of  these  two  countries  was  granted  access  to  the  Danube  by  the  other following the Treaty of Edirne. After one of these two countries was victorious at Philippopolis and Shipka Pass, it was able to force the treaty of San Stefano upon the other. France and Britain were drawn into the Crimean War after the navies of these two empires clashed at Sinope. For ten points, Alexander III and Sultan Abdul Hamid II led what two empires that often fought over territory in the Black Sea?	ANSWER: Russiaand theOttomanEmpire (both answers required)
One of these weapons was the source of General John Henry Parker’s nickname. During the New York Draft Riots, one of these weapons was used to defend the New York Times by Henry Raymond. These guns were used in the Emu War, and they were made by companies like Lewis and Vickers. In World War One, synchronization gears were included on aircraft so that these guns could fire through propellers. The use of these guns in “nests” and trenches killed soldiers in No Man’s Land. For ten points, Hiram Maxim and John Gatling invented what type of fast-firing gun?	ANSWER: MachineGuns (acceptGatlingGun orMaximmachine gun before they are mentioned)
With Hugh Meredith, this man founded a publication that published a political cartoon created by this man showing a snake cut into eight parts above the words “Join, or Die.” This man established the first  library  in  all  of  America  and  the  first  fire  department  in  a  city  where  he  also  established  an  Ivy League institution in 1765. The editor of thePennsylvania Gazette, for ten points, name this Founding Father sometimes called “The First American.”	ANSWER: Benjamin Franklin
Some of this country’s most famous writers include Chinua Achebe [shin-waUH-sheh-bay] and Wole Soyinka, and a civil war broke out in this country when the region of Biafra attempted to secede. President Goodluck Jonathan of this country was heavily criticised for his failure to prevent the 2014 kidnapping of the Chibok girls, and it has suffered many terrorist attacks from Boko Haram. For ten points, name this African country with its capital at Lagos.	ANSWER: Nigeria Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 3
A  camel-topped,  pyramidal  monument  in  this  state  honors  “Hi  Jolly,”  a  camel  driver  who  helped explore this state. This state is home to the pyramidal tomb of Charles Poston, this state’s “father,” near Florence; the pyramidal tomb of George W.P. Hunt, this state’s first governor, in Maricopa County; and an inverted-pyramid municipal building in Tempe. For ten points, name this southwestern American state governed from Phoenix.	ANSWER: Arizona
At  this  battle,  General  McClellan  was  so  impatient  to  get  his  forces  moved  that  he  issued  the command, “Tell him if it costs 10,000 men he must go now.” “Bloody Lane” earned its nickname after being the site of 5500 casualties at this September 17th, 1862 battle. As a result of this battle, the Army of the Potomac was able to stop Lee’s invasion of Maryland. For ten points, name this bloodiest single-day battle of the U.S. Civil War.	ANSWER: Battle of Antietam
This  musician  worked  with  guitarist  John  McLaughlin  onIn a Silent Way,  perhaps  the  most influential  fusion  album  of  the  1960s.  The  second  movement  ofConcierto de Aranjuezwas  adapted  in this man’s albumSketches of Spain. He pioneered cool jazz with the albumThe Birth of the Cool, and a 1959 album by him opens with the track “So What.” For ten points, name this influential jazz trumpeter behindKind of BlueandMilestones.	ANSWER: MilesDavis
This man deployed the Blue Division to fight in Russia and created the National Movement as part of  a  corporatist  state.  In  the  Ifni  War  this  man  lost  territory  in  the  Sahara  to  Morocco,  although  he refused  to  cede  Ceuta  and  Melilla.  He  chose  Juan  Carlos  I  as  his  successor  and  avoided  joining  Hitler during World War Two, averting war with Britain by not attacking Gibraltar. For ten points, name this Generalissimo and longtime dictator of Spain.	ANSWER: Francisco Franco
Description  acceptable.  After  this  event,  its  subject  gave  an  object  to  a  maid  at  a  brothel,  who promptly fainted. Martin Bailey has suggested this non-fatal action may have occurred after its subject found out his brother Theo was getting married. This event occurred in 1888 after its subject got into an argument with Paul Gauguin at their house in Arles. For ten points, name this event, in which a Dutch painter lost a body part.	ANSWER: VincentVanGoghcuttingoff his ownear(accept anything with the wordsVanGoghand ear, and something indicating it is beingremoved) Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 3
This country’s classical music includes a suite with movements about the 1710 Siege of Viborg. This country’s national anthem, “Maamme,”[mahhm-may] ends that collection, theKarelia Suite, which was written by this country’s most prominent composer, Jean Sibelius. Sibelius’ most famous work is named for this country and protested Russian censorship of its early 20th century nationalism. For ten points, name this country where many of Sibelius’ works were premiered in Helsinki.	ANSWER: Finland
Alexander  Bliss  preserved  a  copy  of  this  speech  that  had  been  requested  by  George  Bancroft.  A two-hour oration by Edward Everett preceded this speech. The end of this speech claims that “government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.” The phrase “Fourscore and seven years ago” opens, for ten points, what Abraham Lincoln speech delivered after a Civil War battle?	ANSWER: GettysburgAddress
In this country, Erich Hoenmanns sparked the Mechelen Incident after he crashed his plane, revealing a  planned  invasion  called  Case  Yellow.  This  country  was  the  target  of  the  18  Days”  Campaign,  which included  a  valiant  but  futile  defense  at  the  river  Leie.  The  Force  Publique,  soldiers  from  this  country’s colony  the  Congo,  clashed  with  Italian  soldiers  in  World  War  II.  Leopold  III  led,  for  ten  points,  what country that surrendered to Germany after the fall of Brussels?	ANSWER: Belgium
During this conflict, suspected collaborators were tortured in the Phoenix Program. The Siege of Khe Sanh took place in this conflict after it was widened following a phantom attack on the USSMaddoxin the Gulf of Tonkin. American troops in this conflict were criticized for their use of Agent Orange. For ten points, name this unpopular Southeast Asian war that ended with the capture of Saigon.	ANSWER: VietnamWar
A race riot in this state destroyed the neighborhood of Greenwood, which was known as “Black Wall Street.” The Red River of the South is the southern border of this state, whose capital was the target of the Timothy McVeigh bombing. The Trail of Tears took Native Americans to this state, which was then called “Indian Territory.” The “Sooners” settled, for ten points, what state directly north of Texas?	ANSWER:Oklahoma
This leader’s premier was nearly blown up by a bomb on theKashmir Princesswhile dispatched to the Bandung Conference. The Cultural Revolution was organized by this man to stop bourgeois infiltrators from restoring capitalism in his country. This man first came to prominence while leading the Long March to save his army from the Nationalists.The Little Red Bookis a collection of sayings by, for ten points, what father of Communist China?	ANSWER: MaoZedong Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 3
24,000 tons of dynamite were detonated at once so that this project could utilize the Culebra Cut. This project, which was greatly expanded after a 2006 referendum approved the Third Lock project, was the  subject  of  the  Torrijos-Carter  treaties.  Theodore  Roosevelt  supported  the  construction  of,  for  ten points, what Central American waterway that connects the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans?	ANSWER:PanamaCanal
This man expressed his desire that “poisonous envenomed worms” be drafted into forced labor, and demanded synagogues be burned to the ground in hisOn the Jews and their Lies. Frederick III kidnapped this  man  and  held  him  in  Wartburg  Castle  to  protect  him  from  the  Holy  Roman  Emperor.  InExsurge Domine, Leo X threatened this man with excommunication if he didn’t recant his beliefs. For ten points, name this former German friar who created the95 Theses.	ANSWER: Martin Luther
John Singer Sargent created a portrait of this man “painting by the edge of a wood” with his wife Alice. This artist, who observed and painted the Rouen Cathedral under several different light conditions, built a garden-filled estate in Giverny [zhi-vair-nee] that is now a museum dedicated to him. Japanese-style bridges and water lilies were popular subjects of paintings by, for ten points, what French painter whose painting of a sunrise gave its name to the Impressionist movement?	ANSWER: Claude Monet[moh-nay]
In the aftermath of this battle, Benjamin Lincoln accepted the sword of Charles O’Hara. The losing side in this battle attempted to retreat to Gloucester Point. A British band at this battle may have started playing “The World Turned Upside Down.” A fleet under Comte de Rochambeau blocked reinforcements from this battle in the Battle of Chesapeake Bay. Charles Cornwallis was defeated at, for ten points, what 1781 battle, the final major clash of the American Revolution?	ANSWER: Battle ofYorktown
Lewis Keseberg, a member of this group, was nearly lynched after being found with over $200 and a pistol belonging to this group’s namesake. James Reed attempted to rescue this group, which attempted to  cross  the  Hastings  Cutoff  after  a  late  departure  from  Independence,  Missouri.  For  ten  points,  name this group of pioneers that led a doomed 1846 overland expedition to California that famously resulted in cannibalism.	ANSWER: DonnerParty
In the alleged first game of this sport, one team dressed in handkerchiefs and turbans to distinguish themselves from the other team, and Rutgers beat Princeton 6 to 4. Lorin Deland invented this sport’s “flying wedge” play, which was banned in 1894. In 1905, Teddy Roosevelt invited leaders of this sport to the White House to discuss its poor safety record; shortly after, rules changes supported by John Heisman made the forward pass legal. For ten points, name this sport in which teams once earned four points for a touchdown.	ANSWER: American football
A  “Great”  ruler  with  this  name  negotiated  with  Basil  II  in  order  to  marry  his  daughter  Anna; that prince of Novgorod witht his name began the process of Christianizing the Kievan Rus after being impressed by a trip to Constantinople. A modern leader with this first name alternated terms as president of  his  country  with  Dmitry  Medvedev  and  controversially  annexed  the  Crimea  in  2014.  For  ten  points, give this first name of the current President of Russia.	ANSWER: Vladimir(acceptVladimirthe Great; acceptVladimirPutin after “modern” is read)
The Eleutherian Gunpowder Mills were built in this state by a Frenchman. An asthmatic patriot from this state rode through a rainstorm to reach the Continental Congress. This state’s city of Lewes was the site of the Swedish colony of Fort Christina. The company that would become Du Pont is headquartered in this state, which Caesar Rodney represented at the Continental Congress. The first state to ratify the US Constitution was, for ten points, what state with capital Dover?	ANSWER: Delaware
This country renamed its capital after its then-dictator in the 1930s and built a massive cross-shaped monument  to  Christopher  Columbus  for  the  500th  anniversary  of  his  landing  in  the  Americas.  When the only country that borders this country was led by Stenio Vincent, Vincent was too weak to ask for compensation  after  this  country’s  troops  committed  the  Parsley  Massacre.  For  ten  points,  name  this country in which President Rafael Trujillo killed Creole-speaking migrants from neighboring Haiti.	ANSWER: DominicanRepublic Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
Frederick the Great gave this man the nickname “Cyclops,” in reference to his worsening vision in one eye; later, this man remarked “Now I will have fewer distractions,” upon losing sight in both eyes. The publication of this man’sLetters to a German Princesswas supported by Catherine the Great. This thinker developed basic graph theory to conclude that no path could cross each of the seven bridges of Konigsberg only once. For ten points, name this Swiss mathematician, the namesake of the constant e.	ANSWER: Leonhard Euler([oy-ler], but be lenient)
A photograph taken by Yevgeny Khaldei in this city was edited to prevent accusations of looting and depicts a man waving a Soviet flag above a destroyed building. A structure in this city contains the mural “My God, Help Me to Survive This Deadly Love;” that structure was once crossed at Checkpoint Charlie. In a 1963 visit, John F. Kennedy said he was a citizen of, for ten points, what European city that was divided by a namesake wall during the Cold War?	ANSWER:Berlin(accept WestBerlinand/or EastBerlinafter “mural” is read)
This city’s tallest commercial building is One Franklin Square, which was granted an exemption to the 1910 Height of Buildings Act and reaches 210 feet. In 2017, stained glass windows commemorating Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson were removed from this city’s third tallest building, the National Cathedral. For ten points, name this city where every building is at least 200 feet shorter than a 555-foot monument to the first President of the United States.	ANSWER: WashingtonD.C. (acceptDC; acceptDistrictofColumbia)
Alonso de Avellaneda wrote an unauthorized sequel to this novel, causing its author to rush its second volume to completion ten years after its first volume appeared. The tale of a captive in the 39th chapter of this novel was based on its author’s kidnapping by pirates and enslavement by the Moors. This novel’s title character is bored of his life in La Mancha, causing him to take a noble name and become a knight. For ten points, name this novel by Miguel de Cervantes.	ANSWER: DonQuixote
This war was the subject of a controversy in which members of the 1st Mechanized Infantry Division used bulldozers to clear out fortified lines by burying enemy troops alive. This war’s losing side attempted to retreat through Highway 80, the so-called “Highway of Death.” Norman Schwarzkopf was able to win this war within sixty days of the initial invasion of Kuwait. For ten points, name this war in which George H.W. Bush authorized Operation Desert Storm against Saddam Hussein’s Iraqi forces.	ANSWER: PersianGulfWar (accept FirstGulfWar; acceptFirstIraqWar; do not prompt on Iraq War alone; prompt on Desert Storm before mentioned) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
Foreign  intervention  in  this  conflict  prompted  the  battles  of  Outpost  Harry  and  Pork  Chop  Hill. During this war, Matthew Ridgeway replaced a general who masterminded a decisive landing at Inchon, Douglas  MacArthur.  A  demilitarized  zone  was  created  after  an  armistice  was  signed,  though  there  has still been no peace treaty to end this war. For ten points, name this 1950s conflict on an Asian peninsula.	ANSWER:KoreanWar
Contamination with this substance killed 21 people in the Bradford sweets poisoning. Until James Marsh developed a test for this substance, it was an untraceable poison and earned the name “inheritance powder.” Autopsy reports and other studies found this element in the hair of Napoleon, Simon Bolivar, and King George III. For ten points, name this poisonous element, a common and deadly drinking water contaminant whose chemical symbol is As [AS].	ANSWER:arsenic(acceptAsbefore mentioned)
Two weeks before this battle, the invading force made their landing at Pevensey. During this battle, one side’s housecarls made a stand on Senlac Hill until their leader was struck in the eye by an arrow. This battle arose out of a dispute over whom Edward the Confessor named as his successor. The Bayeux Tapestry depicts the death of Harold Godwinson in, for ten points, what battle that confirmed William the Conqueror’s rule over England in 1066?	ANSWER: Battle of Hastings
In June 2017, a set of protective electric barriers nine miles from this lake failed to keep out a silver Asian carp. Northerly Island in this lake was home to Meigs Field, an airport that was shut down in 2003 by  Richard  Daley.  South  of  Sault  Ste.  Marie [soosaintmarie],  the  Straits  of  Mackinac[mack-ih-naw] connect this lake to Lake Huron to the east. For ten points, name this Great Lake on the western shore of its namesake US state.	ANSWER: Lake Michigan
This man oversaw the creation of a Brazilian rubber planation and city named for him, as well as the River Rouge Plant in the US. This man attacked Jewish people through his newspaper,The Dearborn Independent. This man restricted one of his products to “any color, so long as it’s black.” The US’s “Big Three”  are  Chrysler,  General  Motors  and  the  company  founded  by,  for  ten  points,  what  American  car maker whose assembly lines built millions of Model Ts?	ANSWER: Henry Ford Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
James  Scobie  died  in  this  country,  leading  to  the  creation  of  the  Eureka  Flag.  In  this  nation,  the captain of theBounty, William Bligh, was deposed in the Rum Rebellion. An island in this country was first reached by Abel Tasman in 1642. At Botany Bay, convicts and Aborigines met in what became an English penal colony. For ten points, name this country where, in 1770, James Cook landed near what is now the city of Sydney.	ANSWER: Australia
Description acceptable. This event was briefly halted when a nearby patrol forced William Dawes to flee;  he  subsequently  fell  off  his  horse  and  could  not  finish  his  mission.  This  event’s  central  participant slipped by theSomersetby boat after Robert Newman had placed two lanterns in the Old North Church. Militia were able to prepare to fight at Lexington and Concord thanks to, for ten points, what event in which a Boston silversmith warned of approaching British soldiers?	ANSWER: PaulRevere’s midnightride(accept elaborations; prompt on partial answers, like “midnight ride”)
This  artist  sculpted  the  facade  of  a  memorial  for  Julius  II,  including  a  seated  sculpture  of  Moses with small horns. A sculpture of a Biblical hero by this artist was originally commissioned for the Duomo Cathedral and lacks both a sword and the severed head of a giant, unlike a similar work by Donatello. For ten points, name this Italian artist of a nude marbleDavidand the ceiling frescos of the Sistine Chapel.	ANSWER: MichelangeloBuonarroti(accept either or both names)
In this city, Walter Ulbricht initially denied building what later became known as the Anti-Fascist Protection  Rampart.  In  1963,  JFK  claimed  that  it  was  the  “proudest  boast”  of  a  free  person  to  be  a citizen of this city. Later, Ronald Reagan spoke in front of this city’s Brandenburg Gate and commanded Gorbachev to tear down this city’s wall. For ten points, name this once-divided city whose eastern half served as the capital of East Germany.	ANSWER: Berlin
After this man’s Kirtland Safety Society failed financially, he fled to Clay County, Missouri. This man forced theNauvoo Expositorto shut down by destroying its press, leading to his death in Carthage Jail while awaiting trial. This man claimed to have received golden plates from the angel Moroni, as well as  two  seer  stones,  near  the  Sacred  Grove  in  western  New  York.  For  ten  points,  name  this  American religious leader and founder of Mormonism.	ANSWER: JosephSmith Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
This man exiled a rival to Compi ́egne[com-pain] after she tried to have this man dismissed in the Day of the Dupes. This rival of Marie de Medici and founder of the Academie Fran ̧caise engineered the siege of La Rochelle and French participation in the Thirty Years’ War, and was known as the “Red Eminence”. For ten points, name this cardinal and chief minister to Louis XIII.	ANSWER: CardinalRichelieu(or Armand JeanduPlessis)
This man gathered a small handful of early followers at a deer park near Sarnath. During one sermon, this man was not understood by anyone except Mahakashyapa, who smiled when this man held up a white lotus. After this figure’s enlightenment, he described the Eightfold Path as a method of escaping samsara and  attaining  nirvana.  For  ten  points,  name  this  religious  figure  whose  teachings  form  the  basis  for  an Asian religion.	ANSWER: Siddhartha Gautama(or theBuddha)
Japan’s capture of this location led to the largest surrender of British forces in history. The British East India Company annexed this island from the Sultanate of Johor, allowing Stamford Raffles to found a  trading  post  that  has  developed  into  the  southernmost  of  the  four  “Asian  Tiger”  economies.  For  ten points, name this island city-state that was expelled from Malaysia in 1965.	ANSWER: Singapore
A poet who fought in this war described escaping from the battle “down some profound dull tunnel” into  Hell.  In  a  novel,  Albert  Kropp’s  leg  is  amputated  during  this  war.  Another  poem  about  this  war describes “an ecstasy of fumbling/Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time” and takes its title from Horace’s “old Lie.” Wilfred Owen fought in, for ten points, what war, the setting for Erich Maria Remarque’s novel All Quiet on the Western Front?	ANSWER:WorldWarI(orWWIor theGreatWar)
This phrase was coined in an 1845 article that argued that foreign nations should stop “thwarting our policy and hampering our power” and allow the annexation of Texas. This phrase was used again by John O’Sullivan in debate over the border of the Oregon Country. This concept inspired Democrats who called for war with Mexico, as well as settlers who set off on the Oregon Trail. For ten points, name this belief that the United States was meant to expand westward to the Pacific Ocean.	ANSWER: ManifestDestiny
Daniel Dennett wrote a book titled for this man’s “Dangerous Idea.” Some of this man’s work was jointly published with Alfred Russel Wallace. His work was defended by the “Bulldog” Thomas Huxley as superior to the similar theories proposed by Lamarck. This man described his journey to the Galapagos Islands  in  1839’sThe  Voyage  of  the  Beagle.  For  ten  points,  name  this  British  scientist  whoseOn  the Origin of Speciesis considered the cornerstone of evolutionary biology.	ANSWER: Charles Darwin Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 3
This  body  chose  members  of  the  Trusteeship  Council,  which  oversaw  various  territories  as  part  of decolonization efforts. It created the 1947 partition plan for Israel and Palestine and passed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This body has chosen men such as U Thant[ootant] and Kofi Annan to serve as Secretary-General, and it elects the temporary members of the Security Council. For ten points, name this deliberative body of the United Nations in which each of the 193 members has one vote.	ANSWER: United Nations GeneralAssembly(prompt on United Nations or UN until mentioned)
A treaty agreed to during this man’s presidency revolutionized diplomacy by requiring arbitration to settle disputes over the American-Canadian border. During this man’s presidency, the popular Pinckney’s Treaty  with  Spain  and  the  unpopular  Jay’s  Treaty  with  Great  Britain  were  both  signed.  He  urged  the United  States  to  resist  “entangling”  alliances  with  Europe  and  avoid  political  parties  in  his  farewell address. Thomas Jefferson served as the Secretary of State to, for ten points, what first U.S. President?	ANSWER: GeorgeWashington
During this war, Operations Killer and Ripper were ordered by Matthew Ridgway. Fighting over the Iron Triangle in this war took place in the Battles of Triangle Hill and Pork Chop Hill. In this war, US F-86 Sabres fought over MiG Alley and an intervention by Chinese forces over the Yalu River led to the dismissal of Douglas MacArthur. The United States led UN forces to the 38th parallel in, for ten points, what war fought over an East Asian peninsula that is now divided into North and South countries?	ANSWER: KoreanWar
This artist showed three women crying as three brothers raise their arms toward swords in one work based  on  Roman  legend.  This  Neoclassicist  painter  later  depicted  Napoleon  with  a  hand  tucked  in  his clothes in his study at the Tuileries [too-leh-ree], and on a rearing horse crossing the Alps. The subject of one of this artist’s works lies slumped over a desk in his bathtub after being stabbed by Charlotte Corday. For ten points, identify the French painter ofThe Oath of the HoratiiandThe Death of Marat.	ANSWER: Jacques-LouisDavid
The aftermath of this event led to the creation of the Quadruple Alliance and the formation of the 38 state German Confederation. It restored the Bourbon Dynasty in France with Louis XVIII. This meeting was interrupted by the Hundred Days and it was headed by Austrian minister Klemens von Metternich. For ten points, name this 1815 meeting that sought to organize post-Napoleonic Europe.	ANSWER:CongressofVienna
This document calls one leader a “dread sovereign” and advocates to “combine ourselves together in a civil body politic.” It was dated using the Julian Calendar instead of the Gregorian Calendar, and it was recorded in a journal by William Bradford. For ten points, name this 1620 agreement signed by the pilgrims who founded Plymouth Colony.	ANSWER: MayflowerCompact
In 2012, this man announced a “Return to Sovereignty” day. This man, who accused the show Asa Zuba! of slander, leads a coalition between the NKP and his Liberal Democrats. He recently updated the “three-arrows”  of  his  namesake  economics  but  has  been  criticized  for  numerous  visits  to  the  Yasukuni Shrine. For ten points, name this current Prime Minster of Japan.	ANSWER: ShinzoAbe
This  man  received  one  appointment  originally  intended  for  Frederick  Funston.  Edward  House prevented  the  official  reprimand  of  this  man  for  protesting  a  potential  armistice  to  Supreme  Allied Council. He was the first American to be promoted to General of the Armies during his lifetime, due to his  service  commanding  the  American  Expeditionary  Force  in  World  War  I.  For  ten  points,  name  this American general, nicknamed “Black Jack.”	ANSWER: John Joseph “Black Jack” Pershing
A  poem  about  this  river  notes  that  “Wushan’s  clouds  and  rain”  will  be  held  back  by  “walls  of stone.” Those walls predicted a dam, completed in 2012, that now blocks silt from traveling downstream, potentially weakening Shanghai on its mouth. The Three Gorges Dam was built on, for ten points, what longest river in Asia?	ANSWER: YangtzeRiver
Marc Dubois suffered from this condition as the pilot of Air France Flight 447, which crashed in 2009. World records for this condition are no longer maintained due to fear of harm, but the last scientifically documented  record  for  this  condition  is  Randy  Gardner’s  264  hours.  Tracy  Morgan  was  injured  in  a bus accident caused by a Walmart truck driver suffering from this condition. For ten points, name this condition that causes irritability and yawning.	ANSWER: sleepdeprivation(acceptinsomniaand equivalents likefatigue,exhaustion,tiredness, or a generallackofsleep) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 3
Theodore Parker and Gerrit Smith were part of the Secret Six that funded this man’s actions. The Fugitive  Slave  Act  prompted  this  man  to  create  The  League  of  the  Gileadites.  His  son  was  killed  by the forces of John Reid in Osawatomie. The Sack of Lawrence prompted this man to participate in the Pottawatomie Massacre. Robert E. Lee stopped this man from attempting to overtake a federal armory in West Virginia. For ten points, name this abolitionist who led an 1859 raid on Harper’s Ferry.	ANSWER: John Brown
This  woman  defeated  the  Emirate  of  Granada,  ending  the  Reconquista  period  of  her  country.  She sponsored the trips of an explorer from Genoa who started Spanish colonization of the New World. For ten  points,  name  this  Castilian  queen  who  married  Ferdinand  II  of  Aragon  and  sponsored  the  trips  of Christopher Columbus.	ANSWER:IsabellaI of Castille
This man gave the Appeal of 18 June Speech during one war. This leader’s opposition to the European Commission led to the Empty Chair Crisis. He was later criticized after Expo 67 for proclaiming “Long live free Quebec!” This man’s government ended a conflict with the FLN by signing the Evian Accords. He was brought to power in the May Crisis, leading to the formation of the Fifth Republic. For ten points, name this French Prime Minister who led the Free French Forces during WWII.	ANSWER: Charles de Gaulle
Xerxes  the  Great  built  a  throne  hall  with  one  hundred  of  these  features  in  Persepolis.  The  term entasis refers to the gradual decrease in these objects’ diameter as they rise, removing the optical illusion that these objects bend inward. One style of these objects uses a scroll for the capital; in addition to that Ionic type, these objects come in Doric and Corinthian orders. For ten points, name these architectural elements which usually bear the weight of a roof or ceiling.	ANSWER:columns orpillars
Thisalchemistandpursuerofthephilosopher'sstonedevelopedatheoryofcolorhe discussedinthebookOpticks.Thisscientist'sMathematicalPrinciplesofNaturalPhilosophy explainedhislawofuniversalgravitation,developedusingacalculusnotationhederived independentlyofGottfriedLeibniz[[LIBE-nitz]].Fortenpoints,namethisEnglishpolymath who also theorized three eponymous laws of motion.	ANSWER: Sir IsaacNewton
In1903,PresidentTheodoreRooseveltsetasidethisisland'sCrownLandsofEl Yunque[[YOON-keh]]toestablishaforestreserve,andtoday,thatregionofthisislandisthe onlytropicalU.SNationalForest.TheArecibo[[ah-reh-SEE-boh]]Observatory,aradio telescopeonthisisland,collapsedinlate2020.Thisisland'scapitalcityofSanJuanisthe oldestEuropeansettlementinwhatisnowtheUnitedStates.Fortenpoints,namethis Spanish-speaking island, the largest U.S. commonwealth.	ANSWER: Commonwealth ofPuerto Rico(or Estado LibreAsociado dePuerto Rico; accept Boriken)
IntheLifeofSaintBoniface,thetitlesaintcutsdownatreesacredtothisnon-Roman deityinHesse[[HEH-suh]].InhistreatiseGermania,Tacitus[[TASS-ih-tuss]]referredtothis godasthe"Hercules"oftheSuebi[[SWAY-bee]]people,while"Mercury"wastheequivalent ofOdin.InoppositiontotheChristianizationofScandinavia,manybelieversworecharms depictingthisgod'shammerMjölnir[[MYOHL-neer]].Fortenpoints,namethis widely-worshipped red-headed Norse god of thunder.	ANSWER:Thor(acceptThunar; orDonar)
Theideaforthiswork'sfourthandfinalmovementwaslikelyborrowedfromthe workofLuigiCherubini[[keh-roo-BEE-nee]]andconsistsofalengthycodafollowedby29 barsofCMajorchords.Thispiece'scomposersupposedlytoldhissecretary,Anton Schindler,thatitsopeningmotifrepresented"fateknockingatthedoor."Afamous "short-short-short-long"motifopens,fortenpoints,whatsymphonybyLudwigvon Beethoven?	ANSWER: Beethoven'sFifth(or Symphony No.5by Ludwigvan Beethoven in C minor)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 4
IndependenceHallwasrenovatedtoreceivethisdignitaryduringan1824-25tourof theUnitedStates,andhewasgreetedwithcrowdsateverystop.Thisperson,whoelevated Louis-PhilippetotheFrenchthroneaftertheJulyRevolution,draftedtheDeclarationofthe RightsofManincoordinationwithThomasJefferson.ContinentaltroopsatYorktownwere led in part by, for ten points, which French nobleman who joined the American Revolution?	ANSWER: Guilbert duMotier, Marquis deLafayette(accepteither underlined portion)
JosefStalinsentemployeesofthiscompany’sGorkiplantinNizhnyNovgorodtoa gulagduringtheGreatPurge.In1932,morethan60workerswereinjuredbythis company'ssecurityandDearbornpolicefollowing[thiscompany's]"HungerMarch."This company’s“Edsel”lineofcarswasnamedforthesonofitsfounderandbecame synonymouswithfailureinthe1950s.Fortenpoints,namethiscompanywhichmadethe popular Escort, F-Series, and Model T automobiles.	ANSWER:FordMotor Company
JohnBalliol[[BAY-lee-ahl]]abdicatedthispositionandwassuccessfullyfreedby PopeBonifaceVIII[[theeighth]]followingEdwardI'sinvasionofhiskingdom.OneofIdi Amin'smanytitlesproclaimedhimtobethe"Last"persontoholdthisregalposition.The Catholic-driven"RisingoftheNorth"attemptedtoreplaceElizabethIwithhercousinMary, whoheldthistitle.RoberttheBruceandtheHouseofStuartheld,fortenpoints,whatroyal title also held by Macbeth?	ANSWER:RulerofScotland(orRulerofScots; accept"Monarch", "Queen", or "King" in place of "Ruler")
Severalcity-statesofthiscivilizationweredefeatedbytheirrival,SpearthrowerOwl, aleaderofTeotihuacan[[teh-oh-tee-HWAH-kan]].ThemilitaryoutpostofDosPilas [[PEE-lahss]]switchedbetweenthiscivilization'stworivalcitiesofCalakmul [[kah-lahk-MOOL]]andTikal[[tee-KAHL]].TheTempleofKukulcan[[koo-kool-KAHN]]was builtinthiscivilization'ssettlementofChichenItza[[CHEE-chenEE-tzah]].Fortenpoints, name these Mesoamerican people who developed a namesake "Long Count" calendar.	ANSWER:MayaPeople (orMayans; acceptK'ichepeople)
ChemistFriedrichAccum[[ah-KUHM]]wroteatreatiseconcerningthisfood, denouncingthepre-modernpracticeofusingnon-foodssuchaschalkandsawdustas additives.Thescarcityofthisfoodstuffledtothe"MarchonVersailles"[[vehr-"SIGH"]]by ParisianwomenintheearlyFrenchRevolution.InJuvenal's[[JOO-veh-nahls]]Satires,he pairedthiswordwith"circuses"tosignifymollifyingthemasses.Fortenpoints,namethis staple food of the Western world made from grinding and baking wheat.	ANSWER:Bread(acceptPanem; accept specific typesofBread; prompt on "Grain")  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 4
NationsincludingEstoniaandIrelandsponsoreda1923letterbythisgroup presentedtotheLeagueofNationstogainfurtherautonomy.Thisgrouprelinquishedclaims totheU.S.MidwestintheNanfanTreaty,namedforthegovernorofNewYork.Thisgroup negotiatedtheProclamationof1763toprotectthemselvesfromsettlercolonizationpast theAppalachians.TribesincludingtheOneida[[oh-NY-dah]]andMohawkmadeup,forten points,which“Confederacy”ofsixnationswhoactedasalliesoftheBritishthroughoutthe 18th century?	ANSWER:IroquoisConfederacy (or League of theIroquois;accept theFive Nations; accept theSix Nations; acceptHaudenosaunee)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 4
This university's plan may have been based on that of a failed attempt to create another university at Henricus seventy years prior. The first Greek letter society, Phi Beta Kappa, originated at this university in 1776. The missionary James Blair founded this university, whose students were originally required to declare their belief in the Thirty-Nine Articles, as this university was an Anglican institution at the time. Founded in 1693, this university was advocated for by the House of Burgesses. For ten points, name this university in Williamsburg, Virginia named for two British monarchs.	ANSWER:  The College of William and Mary in Virginia (prompt on W&M)
This man heaped up a funeral pyre of horse saddles on which to immolate himself if he was in danger of being captured at a 451 battle in Gaul. Defeated at that Battle of the Catalaunian Plains by a Roman-Visigoth alliance, he later returned to Italy to renew his marriage claim to Honoria, though he was stopped outside Rome after meeting Pope Leo I. After the death of his brother Bleda, he became king of his people, the Huns. For ten points, name this "Scourge of God."	ANSWER: Attila the Hun
Jeremiah Clarke wrote a "voluntary" for this instrument often played at weddings. J.S. Bach's second Brandenburg Concerto contains a challenging solo for the "piccolo" type of this instrument. Usually pitched in B-flat, this instrument is used to play many fanfares, and has a mellower tone than a cornet. For ten points, name this brass instrument with three valves, commonly used in classical and jazz music.	ANSWER: Trumpet
This holiday was moved forward by a week after Fred Lazarus, Jr., the founder of Macy's, convinced Franklin Delano Roosevelt that the move would lengthen a shopping season. As described in Mourt's Relation, at the first known observation of this holiday in the New World, Susanna White and Mary Brewster helped prepare a feast. In 1621, this holiday celebration lasted for three days and was attended by 90 Wampanoag and 53 Pilgrims. For ten points, what is this holiday, celebrated in the U.S. on the fourth Thursday of November?	ANSWER:  Thanksgiving
This ethnic group's Borjigin clan employed Al-aud-Din to construct counterweighted trebuchets during a conquest that unseated the child-emperor Zhao Bing. This group destroyed the Jin under the leadership of Ogedei, and established their own dynasty after defeating the Song. For ten points, name this Asian civilization that established China's Yuan dynasty under the leadership of Kublai, the grandson of Genghis Khan.	ANSWER:  Mongols    NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021  Bowl Round 4 Page 2 of 10
A solid form of this good created in 1875 was sometimes named "Gala Peter" in honor of Daniel Peter, the first to successfully combine its ingredients. A plant to produce this good was built in a town once known as Derry Church in Pennsylvania. A version of this good including peanuts was developed in 1930 by Franklin Mars. The founder of a company that sells this good invested capital from his earlier Lancaster Caramel Company. That man's namesake company introduced "Kisses" in 1907. For ten points, name this good sold since 1894 by Hershey's.	ANSWER:  Milk chocolate
This entity publishes a report informally known as the Beige Book and was formed partly as a result of the chaos caused by the Panic of 1907. This institution made massive purchases of T-bills and mortgage-backed securities after the 2008 real estate crisis as part of its program of quantitative easing. This institution's Open Market Committee controls monetary policy by targeting the federal funds rate. For ten points, name this central banking system of the United States whose 16th chair person is Jay Powell.	ANSWER:  Federal Reserve System (accept “The Fed”)
Braxton Bragg won the first major battle in this state against William Rosecrans at Chickamauga, but a strategic setback for the Confederates at Kennesaw Mountain left the path to this state's capital open. Namesake "neckties" were used frequently in this state as part of a certain general's "scorched earth" policy. For ten points, name this state where Sherman's March to the Sea left a path of devastation to Savannah from its capital, Atlanta.	ANSWER:  Georgia
This man sold one of his companies to Gil Amelio, against whom he later headed a coup to retake control of another of his companies. To promote one of his products, a hammer thrower smashing a screen was featured in a commercial during Super Bowl XVIII (18). After being ousted from his first company by John Sculley, this man went on to found NeXT and The Graphics Group, later renamed Pixar. For ten points, name this late rival of Microsoft's Bill Gates, who with Steve Wozniak co-founded Apple.	ANSWER: Steve Jobs
This king served as the first Lord President of the Council of the North, which was created under his brother's reign. The Earl of Warwick secretly betrothed this man to his daughter, Isabel Neville, in an attempt to move closer to the throne. This brother of Edward IV became the last king of England to die in battle in 1485, which helped end the Wars of the Roses. The House of Tudor took power from, for ten points, what last king of the House of York who was killed at Bosworth Field?	ANSWER:  Richard III (accept Richard of Gloucester)      NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021  Bowl Round 4 Page 3 of 10
This man’s willingness to testify as a character witness convinced a judge to drop an anti-Communist trial against W.E.B. Du Bois. This scientist’s namesake field equations can be used to calculate spacetime geometry and includes the cosmological constant, which is referred to as this scientist’s “biggest blunder.” In 1952, this scientist was offered the presidency of Israel. For ten points, name this scientist who developed the theory of relativity and the equation E equals m c squared.	ANSWER: Albert Einstein
In the build-up to this case, Shirley Wheeler was arrested and charged with manslaughter. This case, decided at the same time asDoe v. Bolton, was eventually opposed by its own plaintiff who had converted to Catholicism. Norma McCorvey brought forth this case whose aspect of fetal viability was reaffirmed in Casey v. Planned Parenthood. For ten points, name this 1973 court case that legalized abortions.	ANSWER: Roev. Wade
This political party’s principles were outlined in the Tamworth Manifesto, written by Robert Peel as a way to separate his policies from those of his ally, the Duke of Wellington. A modern leader of this party took power after the “Winter of Discontent,” replacing James Callaghan in 1979. For ten points, name this British political party whose members, like Margaret Thatcher, are commonly known as “Tories.”	ANSWER: Conservative(and Unionist) Party (prompt on “Tories” before mentioned)
This  man  started  his  first  company  with  Henry  Flagler  but  later  grew  his  own  enterprises  after absorbing his competitors in the Cleveland Massacre. Ida Tarbell exposed the unethical business practices of this man in a work published inMcClure’s. The Sherman Antitrust Act broke up this man’s company, ultimately  resulting  in  the  formation  of  companies  like  Chevron  and  Exxon.  For  ten  points,  name  this all-time richest American who founded Standard Oil.	ANSWER: John DavisonRockefeller
In a festival celebrating this god on Mount Mycale [my-kuh-lee], a high priest ritually appointed a young  man  “King  of  Priene.”  This  god  supposedly  gave  Peleus,  the  husband  of  Thetis,  two  immortal horses  named  Balius  and  Xanthus  that  were  later  passed  down  to  Achilles.  This  god  competed  with Athena over the patronage of Athens, losing after she gave an olive tree. For ten points, name this Greek god of the sea.	ANSWER: Poseidon
If not soaked in alkali water, depending on this staple crop can cause pellagra through Vitamin B 3 deficiency. In Mesoamerica, archaeologists can tell which people were city-dwelling versus rural-dwelling by whether their teeth show cavities from eating this crop. With squash and climbing beans, this crop is part of the “Three Sisters” of agriculture in North America. For ten points, name this cereal grain that is also known as maize.	ANSWER: corn(acceptmaizebefore mentioned) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 4
In the ground portion of this campaign, the London Irish Rifles captured four soldiers in the Battle of the Graveney Marsh. The failure of this campaign led one side to cancel Operation Sea Lion, a planned amphibious invasion. In response to this campaign, Winston Churchill praised the pilots of the Royal Air Force.  The  Blitz  attacks  on  London  followed,  for  ten  points,  what  air  campaign  against  Great  Britain carried out by Nazi Germany?	ANSWER: BattleofBritain(accept  TheAirBattleforEngland;  acceptLuftschlachtum England; do not accept or prompt on “The Blitz”)
A 2016 mass shooting of police in this city ended when a robot delivered a bomb to this city’s El Centro College. Officer JD Tippit was shot and killed in this city shortly after another shooting that took place in this city’s Dealey Plaza. For ten points, name this city where a Texas School Book Depository was the staging point for Lee Harvey Oswald’s assassination of John F. Kennedy.	ANSWER:Dallas
In  this  novel,  Cassy  and  Emmeline  escape  to  Canada,  where  Cassy  is  reunited  with  her  grandson, Harry, and her daughter, Eliza. Ophelia and Topsy are united by the death of Little Eva in this novel, before Augustine St Clare’s death leaves his wife free to sell the title man to Simon Legree. For ten points, name  this  novel  by  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe  that,  legend  says,  Abraham  Lincoln  credited  with  beginning the Civil War.	ANSWER: UncleTom’sCabin; or, Life Among the Lowly
While contesting power over Silk Road cities in the Fergana Valley, this empire defeated the Tang Dynasty at the River Talas. A ruler of this empire gifted Charlemagne both an elephant and a water clock that perplexed his court. This empire, which was later centered in Mamluk Egypt, had its capital sacked in the 13th century by Hulagu Khan. For ten points, name this empire that built Baghdad and succeeded the Umayyads.	ANSWER: AbbasidCaliphate
Tacitus  recorded  that,  before  this  leader’s  uprising,  a  statue  of  Victory  fell  down,  as  if  turning  its back in retreat. Due to the Roman governor’s absence at Mona, this leader trounced the Ninth Legion and destroyed a temple dedicated to Claudius. Suetonius defeated this ruler’s forces at the Battle of Watling Street. Camulodunum and Londinium were destroyed by an army of Britons led by, for ten points, what British warrior queen of the Iceni?	ANSWER: Boudica(acceptBoadicea)
Eli  Thayer’s  New  England  Emigrant  Aid  Company  attempted  to  sponsor  settlers  to  move  to  this territory. Smugglers used crates labeled “books” to bring Henry Ward Beecher’s rifles into this territory. Settlers  established  towns  like  Manhattan  and  Lawrence  in  this  territory,  the  latter  of  which  was  itself sacked by William Quantrill, a bushwhacker crossing from this territory’s eastern neighbor. For ten points, name this territory that was “Bleeding” in the 1850s due to clashes over slavery in towns like Topeka.	ANSWER: Kansas
One author in this language wrote of a woman whose royal husband communicates with her using a medium after she is killed by soldiers in “The Song of Everlasting Sorrow.” One author in this language wrote  of  the  “rumble-rumble  of  war  chariots”  in  a  poem  bemoaning  the  An  Lushan  Rebellion.  This language was used to write “Drinking Alone By Moonlight” the most noted poem of Li Po. For ten points, name this language in which poets like Bai Juyi and Wang Wei wrote under the Tang Dynasty.	ANSWER: Middle Chinese(acceptMandarin)
During this battle, one side could not move to Gloucester Point due to a storm and could not evacuate at  all  after  the  Battle  of  the  Chesapeake.  According  to  legend,  ceremonies  after  this  battle  featured the  losers  playing  “The  World  Turned  Upside  Down.”  Redoubts  9  and  10  were  captured  during  this siege, which was led by the Comte de Rochambeau and George Washington against forces under Charles Cornwallis.  For  ten  points,  name  this  decisive  battle  of  the  American  Revolution  at  which  the  British army surrendered.	ANSWER: Battle (or Siege) of Yorktown
This  event  led  Governor  Martin  O’Malley  to  declare  a  state  of  emergency  and  caused  significant damage  to  an  amusement  park  in  Seaside  Heights.  This  event’s  coincidence  with  Halloween  season  led it  to  be  dubbed  a  “Frankenstorm,”  while  some  pundits  questioned  whether  it  would  be  an  “October surprise”  in  the  Obama/Romney  election.  Atlantic  City  casinos  were  shut  down  at  the  behest  of  Chris Christie during, for ten points, what 2012 hurricane that flooded New York City and much of the Atlantic seaboard?	ANSWER: Hurricane Sandy(accept SuperstormSandy) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
This battle was preceded by an engagement at Flirey that allowed one side to take control of local railway lines. Fort Vaux and Douamount were heavily contested in this battle. Erich von Falkenhayn was dismissed for failing to win this battle, despite his boast that he would bleed his enemies white. Philippe Petain led French troops to victory in, for ten points, what lengthy 1916 battle for a French fortress city?	ANSWER: Battle ofVerdun
Alexander  the  Great  spared  this  city  after  he  was  shown  a  prophecy  about  the  fall  of  the  Persian empire.  Judas  Maccabeus  captured  this  city  from  the  Seleucids,  and  it  was  renamed  Aelia  Capitolina by  Hadrian.  The  Arch  of  Titus  depicts  the  fall  of  this  city,  which  the  Mount  of  Olives  overlooks.  The Crusades sought to retake this city from the Saracens. The Western Wall and the Dome of the Rock are in, for ten points, what Israeli city?	ANSWER: Jerusalem
This position was to be revered, and the barbarians were to be expelled, according to the slogan “Sonno Joi.”  Scholars  and  politicians  have  debated  whether  the  song  “Kimigayo”  celebrates  this  figure.  Under the Insei, the holder of this position retired to become a Buddhist monk but still held power as a Joko. According to legend, Jimmu was the first holder of this position, whose holders are given a posthumous name reflecting the era in which they ruled. For ten points, what ruler sits on the Chrysanthemum Throne as the leader of an East Asian country?	ANSWER: EmperorofJapan(acceptTenno; acceptMikado)
Bernie Boston was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize for a photo at this location showing a man putting a flower in the barrel of a gun. A set of documents named for this complex were leaked by Daniel Ellsberg and detailed American involvement in Vietnam. A conspiracy theory about this location holds that it was hit by a cruise missile, not an airplane, on September 11th. Arlington County, Virginia is home to, for ten points, what largest office building in the world, the headquarters of the US Department of Defense?	ANSWER: The Pentagon
A  sculpture  of  this  man  “Enthroned”  was  created  by  Horatio  Greenough  in  the  style  of  Zeus  of Olympia. This man was depicted with Commerce, Science, Mechanics, and 13 maidens in hisApotheosis by Constantino Brumidi. This man is the central figure in Grant Wood’sDaughters of the Revolution, and he was depicted in Wood’s painting ofParson Weems’ Fablecutting down a cherry tree. For ten points, name this leader who was depicted crossing the Delaware River.	ANSWER: GeorgeWashington Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
In  1858,  this  object  was  recast  in  Whitechapel,  after  which  a  team  spent  18  hours  hauling  this object to its belfry. This object was silenced following the death of Margaret Thatcher, and is currently disconnected during renovations of Elizabeth Tower. “Quarter bells” that play the Westminster Chimes every 15 minutes accompany, for ten points, what massive bell that names an iconic London clock tower?	ANSWER:BigBen(accept descriptive answers about thebellinBigBenthat say “Big Ben;” prompt on descriptive answers like “the bell in Westminster” that don’t say “Big Ben;” prompt on the Great Bell)
Hermogenes recounts this man’s desire to die relatively young in order to escape the afflictions of old age in an account of this man’sApologyby Xenophon. This husband of Xanthippe was put to death by an Athenian tribunal by drinking hemlock on charges of corrupting the youth. For ten points, name this classical philosopher whose namesake “method” employs rigorous questioning and who mentored Plato.	ANSWER: Socrates
This case was briefly interrupted when judge Robert Jackson suffered a heart attack. The “massive resistance” movement attempted to circumvent this case’s ruling, which was to be carried out with “all deliberate  speed.”  Thurgood  Marshall  argued  for  the  plaintiffs  in  this  case,  which  struck  downPlessy vs. Ferguson.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Supreme  Court  case  that  overturned  the  “separate  but  equal” principle in public schools.	ANSWER: Brownvs Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas
During this battle, heavy fighting took place near Papelotte and La Haye Sainte. Michel Ney led a failed  cavalry  charge  against  the  British  during  this  battle,  where  the  British  Foot  guards  repelled  an attack by the French Imperial Guard, their first defeat. The arrival of the Prussian army under Blucher swung the tide in, for ten points, what 1815 victory for the Duke of Wellington, the last major battle of the Napoleonic Wars?	ANSWER: Battle of Waterloo
This man stuck a needle in his own eye during his studies on light and color, which he published in Opticks.  This  man  feuded  with  Gottfried  Leibniz  over  credit  for  the  invention  of  calculus,  a  system  of math that inspired, but was not proven in, this man’sPrincipia Mathematica. For ten points, name this English scientist who developed the law of universal gravitation and the three laws of motion.	ANSWER: Sir Isaac Newton
In  a  discussion  with  Ethel  Barrymore,  this  man  said  that  Americans  wanted  a  solemn  president “and  he  would  go  along  with  them.”  This  man,  whose  death  prompted  Dorothy  Parker  to  ask  “How can they tell?”, supposedly got his nickname by quipping “You lose” after a woman bet she could “get more than two words out of him.” For ten points, name this US President, known as “Silent Cal,” whose conversational style mimicked his laissez-faire politics of the 1920s.	ANSWER: Calvin Coolidge(prompt on Silent Cal before mentioned) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 4
This god’s “Horkios” aspect represented his role as the keeper of oaths; guilty liars would be forced to  create  votive  statues  at  this  god’s  sanctuary  at  Olympia.  The  ancient  Olympic  Games  were  held  to commemorate this deity. A gold-and-ivory sculpture of this deity was one of the original Seven Wonders of the World and was sculpted by Phidias. The eagle and bull represented, for ten points, what husband of Hera and Greek god of thunder?	ANSWER: Zeus
Members of this class began the Rokugo rebellion after the defeat of their lord. These people, who received stipends in units of rice calledkoku, first rose to prominence during the Kamakura shogunate. Members of this class who were no longer employed were known asronin. These warriors had the right to bear katanas and followed thebushidocode of honor. For ten points, name this noble military class in medieval Japan.	ANSWER:samurai(acceptroninbefore it is mentioned; acceptbushibefore “bushido” is read)
In  this  novel,  a  woman  who  seeks  vengeance  for  the  rape  and  murder  of  her  sister  by  a  callous nobleman  sews  the  names  of  those  she  marks  for  death  into  her  knitting.  Near  the  start  of  this  novel, Doctor  Manette  is  released  from  an  eighteen-year  sentence  in  the  Bastille.  This  novel  ends  as  Sydney Carton is guillotined in place of Charles Darnay during the French Revolution. For ten points, name this Charles Dickens novel titled after London and Paris.	ANSWER: A TaleofTwoCities
A depiction of this event dubbed a customs office as “Butcher’s Hall;” Henry Pelham created that engraving. During this event, Richard Palmes attacked Thomas Preston with a club, prompting a volley of  gunfire  that  killed  Crispus  Attucks.  John  Adams  controversially  agreed  to  defend  a  group  of  British soldiers  accused  of  murder  for  their  roles  in  this  event.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1770  killing  of  five protesters in Massachusetts.	ANSWER: BostonMassacre(accept theIncidentonKingStreet)
George  Miller’s  work  on  this  process  and  its  “magic  number”  was  criticized  by  later  experiments that  demonstrated  the  value  of  “chunking”  in  this  process.  The  ancient  Greek  and  Roman  “method  of loci” was used to improve this process, and autistic savants are frequently mentioned for their ability to perform extreme feats of this process. For ten points, name this mental process that consists of encoding, storing, and retrieving information about past events.	ANSWER: memory
This  crisis  unites  the  storytellers  ofThe Decameron,  who  try  to  escape  it  in  Florence.  This  event spread as far as Iceland, supposedly carried by fleas on rats. This disease, caused by the pathogenYersinia pestis, was named for large swellings of the lymph nodes called buboes. For ten points, name this disease that swept through much of Asia and Europe during the 14th century, killing tens of millions of people.	ANSWER: BlackDeath(or theBlackPlagueor theBubonicPlague; acceptYersiniapestisbefore mentioned)
One of these policies named for Walker improved relations with Great Britain after the repeal of the Corn Laws. One of these policies was described as an abomination and led to the Nullification Crisis, while the Smoot-Hawley example made the Great Depression worse by slowing global trade. NAFTA restricts Canada, Mexico, and the United States from using, for ten points, what type of tax on imported goods?	ANSWER: tariff(accept WalkerTariff,Tariffof Abominations,Smoot-HawleyTariff)
In  this  election  year,  a  primary  campaign  suffered  in  South  Carolina  due  to  flyers  suggesting  he fathered  an  illegitimate  black  child.  This  election  year  featured  John  McCain’s  first  campaign  for  the presidency, and its outcome may have been affected by the use of confusing “butterfly ballots” in Palm Beach County, Florida. For ten points, name this election year in which the popular vote was won by Al Gore, but the electoral college named George W. Bush U.S. President.	ANSWER: 2000US Presidential Election
This  plant  arrived  in  the  New  World  thanks  to  Beatriz  de  Bobadilla,  who  gave  cuttings  of  it  to Christopher  Columbus.  Boiling  houses  converted  the  juice  of  this  plant  into  a  raw  material  that  could then be shaped into a loaf. In the late 18th century, the beet provided a European-based replacement for this crop, which was grown by slave-based plantations throughout the Caribbean. For ten points, name this grass crop that produces stalks rich in sucrose that can be refined into a popular sweetener.	ANSWER: sugarcane(prompt on sugar or cane alone)
The 1951 Accord restored this organization’s independence after years of wartime restrictions that caused the CPI to outpace this organization’s guidelines. In 1933, an Open Market Committee was added to  this  organization,  which  serves  as  the  “lender  of  last  resort.”  Janet  Yellen  currently  chairs,  for  ten points, what central banking system of the United States?	ANSWER: Federal Reserve System Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 4
This  man  consolidated  his  power  when  his  rival  Harry  von  Arnim  was  caught  pilfering  secret government  records.  This  leader  provoked  a  war  in  which  his  nation  gained  Alsace-Lorraine  after  the battles of Sedan and Metz. Leo von Caprivi succeeded this editor of the Ems Dispatch, who espoused the policy of realpolitik[real-pol-ih-teek] in the “Blood and Iron” speech. For ten points, name this instigator of the Franco-Prussian War, an “Iron Chancellor” credited with unifying the German states.	ANSWER: Otto von Bismarck
With Johanna Bethune and Isabella Graham, this man’s wife co-founded an organization that is now Graham Windham, a youth-focused non-profit; this man’s wife also assisted Dolley Madison with finding funds for the Washington Monument. For ten points, name this husband of Elizabeth Schuyler[skyler], an American founding father whose biographer, Ron Chernow, inspired Lin-Manuel Miranda to write a Broadway musical.	ANSWER: AlexanderHamilton
This  action  was  avoided  by  Elvis  Presley  for  two  months  to  filmKing Creole,  but  his  eventual performance of this action inspired the musicalBye Bye Birdie. Muhammad Ali was banned from boxing for 3 years for refusing to engage in this activity. Britain’s Prince Harry started the Invictus Games for people injured in this activity after he did it in Afghanistan. For ten points, name this action which people are drafted into through Selective Service.	ANSWER: militaryservice(generously  accept  equivalents;  accept  equivalents  to  “conscription”  or “beingdrafted” until “he did it” is said)
The Sultanate of Rum failed to stop this campaign, in part because the Danishmends had tied up the forces of Alp Arslan. Peter the Hermit inspired the poor to aid this campaign, whose participants rallied around  the  the  cry  “Deus  vult!”  Following  the  Battle  of  Manzikert,  Alexius  Comnemnus  was  forced  to request this campaign to counteract the power of the Seljuk Turks. Pope Urban II’s Council of Clermont began, for ten points, what Christian campaign that retook Jerusalem from the Muslims in 1099?	ANSWER: FirstCrusade(prompt on Crusade(s))
This thinker’s workThe Sand Reckoneris the most comprehensive surviving source for Aristarchus’ heliocentric theory. He was the first to develop formulas for the volume and surface area of a sphere and invented  a  namesake  “screw”  used  for  raising  water,  but  his  “death  ray”  did  not  actually  sink  a  fleet attacking his home, Syracuse. For ten points, name this scientist who supposedly ran through the streets shouting “Eureka!” after discovering the principle of buoyancy.	ANSWER: Archimedesof Syracuse
Prior  to  this  event,  the  owner  of  Green  Springs  Plantation  had  tried  to  acquire  warriors  from  the Pamunkey  queen  Cockacoeske.  Joseph  Ingram  failed  to  rally  this  movement  after  its  leader  died  of dysentery. It grew from fear of Native American attacks and ended with the hangings of 23 rebels. For ten points, name this 1676 rebellion against Virginia Governor William Berkeley in which Jamestown was burned to the ground.	ANSWER: (Nathaniel) Bacon’s Rebellion
In this battle, an I-168 sank theUSS Hammann, which was picking up survivors from a ship captained by Elliot Buckmaster; that ship lagged behind the Enterprise and Hornet. TheUSS  Yorktownwas lost, but four Japanese carriers were destroyed in, for ten points, what decisive American victory, the turning point of the Pacific theater of World War II?	ANSWER: Battle of Midway
This  scientist  beat  Emile  Berliner  to  the  patent  of  the  carbon  transmitter  and  is  attributed  with creating the world’s first industrial research and development lab, found in West Orange, New Jersey. The quote “genius is 1 percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration” is attributed to this Wizard of Menlo Park. For ten points, name this prolific inventor of the phonograph, movie camera, and incandescent light bulb.	ANSWER: Thomas Edison
Michael  Servetus  believed  that  the  soul  could  be  found  in  this  body  system  and  was  the  first  to correctly describe its function in the lungs. Marcello Malpighi confirmed a hypothesis about this system made  by  a  17th  century  English  physician  about  how  two  major  components  were  connected.  Robert Jarvik  developed  a  replacement  for  the  major  organ  of  this  system,  which  was  studied  by  Galen  and William Harvey. For ten points, name this body system consisting of the heart, blood, and blood vessels.	ANSWER: circulatorysystem  orcardiovascularsystem  (prompt  on  blood  or  similar  descriptions before mentioned at the end) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 4
This organization controlled the Saarland for 15 years before a referendum supported German rule. It did nothing in response to the Mukden incident, after which Japan withdrew from this organization. The U.S. Senate’s refusal to sign the Treaty of Versailles meant that the U.S. never joined this organization. For ten points, name this international body that was unable to prevent World War II and was replaced by the United Nations.	ANSWER: LeagueofNations
This composer popularized a percussion-heavy style music inspired by Janissary bands with an opera in which Belmonte rescues Konstanze from Pasha Selim’s harem. He included heavy Masonic symbolism in  an  opera  in  which  Tamino  overcomes  a  series  of  trials  with  the  help  of  the  title  woodwind.  For  ten points, name this composer ofThe Abduction From The SeraglioandThe Magic Flute.	ANSWER: Wolfgang AmadeusMozart
One of these objects was taken by Vladimir Putin from Robert Kraft, who has earned four of them as  an  owner.  The  1972  design  symbolically  includes  17  diamonds,  and  their  designs  often  include  gems and diamonds in the shapes of Roman numerals and the Vince Lombardi trophy. Tom Brady of the New England Patriots has four of, for ten points, what type of personal jewelry given to players and staff of teams who win the NFL championship?	ANSWER: SuperBowlring(prompt  on  ring  or  Super  Bowl  trophy,  prize,  etc.;  do  not  accept  Vince Lombardi trophy)
One play depicting this event shows Giles Corey being executed with stones. Thomas Danforth and John Hathorne were heavily involved in this event, which was caused by the fits of Abigail Williams and Betty Parris, who were supposedly under the spell of slave Tituba.The Crucibledepicted, for ten points, what 1690s event in which a Massachusetts town executed people for supposedly practicing magic?	ANSWER:SalemWitchTrials
This family’s crest pictures a red cow eating grass against a yellow background. One member of this family hosted an orgy in the Banquet of the Chestnuts. That man, the enemy of Girolamo Savonarola, had formed the League of Venice to oppose Charles VIII’s invasion of Italy. That man’s son had embarked on the Romagna campaign, and was the inspiration for Niccolo Machiavelli’s The Prince. For ten points, name this Italian family whose members included Cesare and Pope Alexander VI.	ANSWER: Borgiafamily Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 4
An 8 inch tall statue of Mao Zedong was placed at this site by an expeditionary team led  by  Wang  Fuzhou  [[WAHNG  FOO-ZHOH]]  who  used  the  "human  ladder"  technique  to reach  it.  The  1970  Khumbu  Icefall  killed  various  local contractors  working  to  prepare Japanese skier Yūichirō Miura's attempt to ski down this peak. This mountain, also called Sagarmatha, was first summitted by Tenzing Norgay and Sir Edmund Hillary. For ten points, name this Himalayan mountain on the Nepal-China border, the highest point on Earth.	ANSWER: Mount Everest (or Chomolungma; accept Sagarmatha before mentioned; accept specific answers like the Summit of Mount Everest) )
Johann  Wolfgang  Döbereiner  [[DUH-buh-"rye"-nuh]]  named  a  set  of  triads  in  an early formulation of this display. John Newlands attempted to create this display, which was inspired  by  the  observations  of  Lothar  Meyer.  Some  members  of  this  diagram  were originally  prefixed  "eka-,"  and  this  diagram  once  contained  entries  such  as  coronium and aether.  Containing  components  like  hydrogen  and  helium,  for  ten  points,  what  diagram, developed by Dmitri Mendeleev [[men-deh-LEY-eff]], organizes the chemical elements?	ANSWER: Periodic Table of Elements
At  this  event,  a  preacher  became  famous  for  saying  "Praise  the  Lord  and  pass  the ammunition"  to  rally  the  spirit  of  the  troops.  This  attack,  codenamed  Operation  Z,  began after one side exclaimed, "Tora! Tora! Tora!" This event resulted in the deaths of over 2,000 servicemen, primarily due to the sinking of both the USS Oklahoma and the USS Arizona. For ten  points,  name  this  attack  on  December  7th,  1941,  in  which  Japan  bombed  a  U.S.  naval base in Hawaii.	ANSWER: Attack on Pearl Harbor (accept equivalents mentioning Pearl Harbor; accept Operation Z before mentioned)
Troops preparing to confront this force were told "I have the heart and stomach of a king" by their leader at Tilbury. This force was commanded by the Duke of Medina Sidonia and  lost  at  the  Battle  of  Gravelines  [[grahv-LEEN]].  Sir  Francis  Drake  helped  defeat  this force  shortly  after he  attacked  Cádiz  to  "singe  the beard  of"  its  nation's  ruler,  Philip  II.  For ten points, name this fleet of ships sent by Spain in 1588 in an attempt to conquer England.	ANSWER: Spanish Armada (or Grande y Felicísima Armada; accept the Great and Most Fortunate Navy; prompt on "Spanish navy" before "naval" is mentioned)  2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 5
This man has been credited with changing how the white U.S. public saw the crime of lynching through his reports on the death of Jesse Washington published in the paper The Crisis. This man, who publicly debated KKK member Lothrap Stoddard, formed the Niagara Movement  with  his  fellow  African-American  lawyers.  The  collection The Souls of Black Folk was written by, for ten points, what rival of Booker T. Washington and NAACP founder?	ANSWER: W. E. B. Du Bois [[doo-BOYSS]] (or William Edward Burghardt Du Bois)
In Operation Northwoods, the Department of Defense proposed intentionally killing immigrants  and  blaming  it  on  this  nation  as  a  false flag.  Freedom  fighters  used  the  yacht Granma to  sail  from  Mexico  to  this  nation  in  the  hope  of  overthrowing  Fulgencio  Batista. The  failure  of  John  F.  Kennedy  to  provide  air  support  doomed  the  exile-led  Bay  of  Pigs invasion of this nation. The 26th of July Movement led by the Castros took control of, for ten points, what nation?	ANSWER: Republic of Cuba (or República de Cuba)
This orator gave the speech "An Undefended Land" to preach the dangers of Nazism to  the  British  people.  In  the  poem  "The  Rowers," this  man  used  the  term  "Hun"  as  a derogatory  name  for  the  citizens  of  the  German  Empire.  This  Orientalist  author  used  the historical "Great Game" as the backdrop for his novel Kim. The first English recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature was, for ten points, what author of The Jungle Book?	ANSWER: Rudyard Kipling (or Joseph Rudyard Kipling)
This  man  once  performed  a  duet  with  Condoleezza  Rice  and  the  following  year performed  during  a  recitation  of  the  names  of  the  dead  at  Ground  Zero  on  the  first anniversary  of 9/11. This  student  of  Leonard  Rose  and  Pablo Casals  typically  plays  a 1733 Montagnana  [[mon-tan-YAH-nuh]]  named  "Petunia,"  though  he  was  also  bequeathed  the Davidov  Stradivarius by  Jacqueline  du  Pré.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Chinese-American classical musician, a world-renowned cellist.	ANSWER: Yo-Yo Ma
This  man  supposedly  diverted  an  invasion  of  Britannia  to  have  his  army  collect seashells  along  the  English  Channel.  While  campaigning  with  his  father,  Germanicus,  this man  earned  a  nickname  related  to  wearing  a  child's  version  of  a  military  outfit.  This emperor,  who  was  assassinated  by  the  Praetorian  Guard,  supposedly  tried  to  make  his horse  Incitatus  [[in-kih-TAH-tuhss]]  a  Roman  consul.  For  ten  points,  name  this  insane successor of Tiberius, whose name translates to "Little Boot."	ANSWER: Caligula (accept Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus; prompt on "Little Boot(s)" before mentioned)  2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 5
While  a  French  colony,  this  nation's  capital  of  Grand-Bassam  was  temporarily abandoned  after  an outbreak  of  yellow  fever  in  favor  of  the  city  of  Bingerville.  A  future president of this nation and leader of the Popular Front, Laurent Gbagbo [[gah-BAHG-boh]], fled  in  the  1980s  due  to  pressure  from  Félix  Houphouët-Boigny  [[oo-FWEH  bwah-NEE]]. For  ten  points,  name  this  West  African  nation  named  for  a  commodity  produced  by elephants, now illegal in most nations.	ANSWER: Ivory Coast (accept Cote D'Ivoire)   2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 5
This  battle  was  formally  ended  when  Charles  O’Hara  surrendered  his  sword  to  Benjamin  Lincoln after trying to give it to Lincoln’s commander. This battle was preceded by a battle in which a fleet led by Thomas Graves was defeated by the Comte de Grasse, the Battle of the Chesapeake. For ten points, name this battle where Charles Cornwallis’s forces were defeated by George Washington, the last major battle of the American Revolution.	ANSWER: Battle (or Siege) of Yorktown(accept German Battle)
As  a  child,  this  ruler  almost  drowned  in  a  pond  after  his  mother,  Anne  of  Austria,  left  him unsupervised. This ruler removed protections for Huguenots in France by revoking the Edict of Nantes. This ruler lost both the War of Devolution and the War of Spanish Succession and ruled with Cardinal Mazarin as his advisor. This ruler built the Palace of Versailles and once said “I am the state.” For ten points, name this longest-reigning French monarch known as the “Sun King.”	ANSWER: LouisXIV
In one of this man’s novels, Frederic Henry fights during the Battle of Caporetto. In another of his novels,  Robert  Jordan  rigs  a  bridge  with  dynamite  during  the  Spanish  Civil  War.  This  member  of  the “Lost Generation” drew on his experiences as an ambulance driver during World War One for his novelA Farewell to Arms. When not at his home in Key West, this author frequently went on African safaris. For ten points, name this American author ofFor Whom the Bell TollsandThe Old Man and the Sea.	ANSWER: Ernest Hemingway
This man died of a cerebral hemorrhage suffered in the House of Representatives while opposing a resolution to honor victorious Mexican-American War generals. An ardent abolitionist, this man argued on behalf of slaves who had revolted inU.S. v. Schooner Amistad. As Secretary of State, this man inspired the  Monroe  Doctrine  and  negotiated  a  treaty  with  Louis  Onis  that  included  the  purchase  of  Florida from Spain. For ten points, name this sixth president of the United States, whose father was the second president.	ANSWER: John QuincyAdams
This  city  began  as  a  small  Akkadian  settlement  and  grew  under  the  Amorite  dynasty  in  the 18th  century  BC.  This  city  was  captured  by  the  Hittites  and  afterwards  the  Kassites,  who  renamed  it Karanduniash. Sennacherib [sen-ACK-uh-rib] led a war against this city, whose sixth king established a code of law engraved on a seven foot tall, black stone stele. For ten points, name this city, once the site of the Ishtar Gate, ruled by Esarhaddon, Nabonidus[na-BOH-nih-duss], and Nebuchadnezzar II.	ANSWER:Babylon Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 5
Johann Peter Salomon gave this man’s 41st and final symphony the nicknameJupiter. This resident of  Salzburg  wrote  a  set  of  variations  on  a  French  folk  song,  later  combined  with  words  as  “Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star.” According to legend, this man left hisRequiemunfinished because he was poisoned by Antonio Salieri. The composer ofA Little Night Musicand the operaThe Magic Flute, for ten points, name this 18th-century Austrian composer and child prodigy.	ANSWER: Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
One  building  in  this  city  was  designed  by  James  Hoban  and  contains  the  Blue  Room.  This  city’s streets were mapped out by Charles L’Enfant[lahn-FAHN], and it is home to a Maya Lin-designed wall with  the  names  of  casualties  of  the  Vietnam  War.  In  this  city,  the  National  Mall  contains  the  Air  and Space  Museum  and  many  other  buildings  owned  by  the  Smithsonian  Institution.  For  ten  points,  name this city whose famous works of architecture include the U.S. Capitol and the White House.	ANSWER: Washington, D.C. (acceptD.C.orDistrictofColumbia)
This company’s John Dustin Archbold was almost assassinated in 1915 at Cedar Cliffs by members of the IWW. The Florida East Coast Railway was developed by one of this company’s founders, Henry Flagler. Muckraker Ida Tarbell wrote a “History of” [this company].” This company was dissolved after it was found to be in violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1911. For ten points, name this petroleum company that was created by John D. Rockefeller.	ANSWER:StandardOilCompany
This organization was fined$500 for littering by the Esperance in Western Australia in 1979. This organization had intended that “litter” for a spot off the coast of South Africa, but it miscalculated how quickly debris from its more than 8 ton and 82 feet long piece of equipment would burn up upon re-entry. For ten points, name this American organization that putSkylabinto orbit and anticipates a 2028 return to earth of the International Space Station.	ANSWER: NationalAeronauticsandSpaceAdministration(acceptNASA)
The brothers Gyrth and Leofwine may have been killed early in this battle defending a shield wall composed of troops called fyrds. One side in this battle was massacred in the Malfosse after retreating. That  side’s  housecarls  were  able  to  hold  Senlac  Hill  until  an  arrow  to  the  eye  killed  their  commander, Harold Godwinson. Depicted on the Bayeux Tapestry, for ten points, identify this 1066 battle that allowed William the Conqueror to take control of England.	ANSWER: Battle ofHastings Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 5
One  faction  of  fans  of  this  sport  supposedly  promoted  the  heresy  of  Monophysitism,  opposing pro-Orthodoxy fans. Supporters of this sport burned half of Constantinople during the reign of Justinian the Great in the Nika Revolt. The richest athlete in this sport, Gaius Appuleius Diocles, competed for the Reds using aquadriga. For ten points, name this sport held in the Byzantine Hippodrome and the Roman Circus Maximus, a highly dangerous vehicular race.	ANSWER: chariotracing(”race” not needed after mentioned; prompt on “racing” before mentioned)
This woman convened the first meeting of the Ninety-Nines. This woman’s spouse debunked baseless rumors that this person was secretly Tokyo Rose. Will Rogers facetiously coined the term “Powder Puff Derby” to describe a race where this pilot took third. The USGSItascafailed to locate this person after she didn’t check-in with Howland Island. Fred Noonan disappeared with, for ten points, what American aviator, the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean?	ANSWER: Amelia Earhart
This  country’s  1997  civil  war  partly  grew  out  of  riots  after  much  of  the  population  fell  for  Ponzi schemes promising 100% interest. The Sigurimi operated in this country under the orders of Communist dictator  Enver  Hoxha [HOE-jah]  who  declared  the  “first  and  only”  Atheist  state.  In  1939,  an  Italian invasion of this country forced its King Zog to flee south to neighboring Greece. For ten points, name this Muslim-majority country in Eastern Europe with capital at Tirane.	ANSWER:Albania
Businesses  selling  this  good  were  attacked  by  the  hatchet-wielding  Carrie  Nation.  Frances  Willard founded an organization which opposed the legalization of this good. The WCTU opposed the use of this substance  which  was  the  subject  of  the  Volstead  Act.  The  18th  Amendment  banned  the  consumption of this substance until it was reversed with the 21st Amendment. For ten points, name this intoxicating substance that was illegal during Prohibition.	ANSWER: alcohol(accept equivalents and more specific answers)
With the help of Cossack K.S. Leontiev, this kingdom’s military modernized in the 1890s and entered a  dispute  with  a  European  power  over  the  wording  of  the  Treaty  of  Wuchale.  This  country,  which  was once controlled by the communist Derg regime, fought a 17-year civil war that ended in 1991 with it losing its access to the Red Sea. Eritrea broke away from, for ten points, what East African country that is also blocked from the sea by Djibouti and Somalia?	ANSWER: Ethiopia(acceptAbyssinia) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
During  a  siege  in  this  conflict,  the  victorious  commander  allegedly  remarked  “we  have  passed”  in response to a speech by Dolores Ibarruri. A so-called Fifth Column of sympathetic civilians aided attackers during  a  battle  won  by  Emile  Mola  in  this  war.  The  Carlists  and  Falangists  were  united  during  this conflict to defeat the Republicans. Francisco Franco won, for ten points, what conflict that included the Siege of Madrid?	ANSWER: SpanishCivilWar
A  genre  of  music  developed  in  this  city  was  originally  called  “la-la”  and  was  pioneered  by  Clifton Chenier, “The King of Zydeco.” A band leader from this city headed the Red Hot Peppers and composed the “King Porter Stomp.” The Original Dixieland Jass Band pioneered traditional jazz in this city, which was also home to a trumpeter who recorded “West End Blues” and “What a Wonderful World.” “Jelly Roll” Morton and Louis Armstrong hailed from, for ten points, what city where musicians parade down Bourbon Street during Mardi Gras?	ANSWER: NewOrleans
The South African Police Service murdered 17 strikers who extracted this commodity in the Marikana Massacre.  Great  Zimbabwe  merchants  often  traded  this  commodity  for  porcelain  and  silk  with  the Sultanate  of  Kilwa.  A  colony  named  for  this  commodity  first  fell  to  a  European  power  after  multiple Anglo-Ashanti Wars. For ten points, name this commodity that, along with salt, was the primary trade good of medieval and early modern West Africa.	ANSWER: gold
Robert  Nozick  has  advocated  for  a  “watchman”  type  of  this  entity,  which  he  details  in  a  book that  pairs  this  entity  withAnarchyandUtopia.  According  to  Max  Weber[VAY-ber],  this  entity  has  a monopoly on the legitimate use of force. When these entities coincide with a particular ethnicity, they are called  the  “nation”  type.  For  ten  points,  give  this  term  that  describes  certain  governmental  entities  as well as divisions of the USA like Vermont and Hawaii.	ANSWER: states (prompt on government(s) before mentioned)
During this man’s presidency, John Fries organized a rebellion by the Pennsylvanian Dutch. This President  signed  a  set  of  four  laws  that  increased  his  power  to  deport  French  immigrants  and  that criminalized anti-government libel, the Alien and Sedition Acts. The “Midnight Judges” were appointed by  this  man  to  promote  Federalist  interests  in  the  court  system  shortly  before  leaving  office.  Thomas Jefferson succeeded, for ten points, what 2nd President of the United States?	ANSWER: John Adams Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
After Woodes Roger threatened these people with execution, they left New Providence. One of these people,  Jean  Lafitte[la-FEET],  aided  American  forces  at  the  Battle  of  New  Orleans  in  exchange  for  a federal pardon. Henry Jennings was one of many of these people who based their forces in Port Royal. A famous leader of these people, Edward Teach, renamed a captured merchant vessel theQueen Anne’s Revenge. For ten points, name this occupation of Blackbeard and other seafaring criminals.	ANSWER: pirates
This monarch tried to force Scotland to give up Queen Mary in marriage to his son in the War of the Rough Wooing. This king executed his advisor Thomas More and effectively replaced him with the author of theBook of Common Prayer, Thomas Cranmer, because More did not attend the coronation of Anne Boleyn. For ten points, name this English king who ordered the executions of two of his six wives.	ANSWER: HenryVIIIof England (prompt on Henry)
This country’s lowland Terai region was divided between the kingdoms of Chaudandi and Makwanpur in the 18th century. The Bodhnath Stupa is a major landmark in this country’s capital, where Gurkha soldiers are recruited. This country contains Sagarmatha National Park as well as the southern faces of mountains such as Cho Oyu, Lhotse, and Annapurna. Kangchenjunga is located on this country’s border with the Indian state of Sikkim. For ten points, name this country whose border with China is home to Mount Everest.	ANSWER: Nepal
This  leader’s  policies  helped  put  the  SEAT  600  automobile  into  mass  production,  leading  to  his country’s economic “miracle.” This leader saw action in the Rif War and eventually became the leader of the Falange party. Juan Carlos I succeeded this man, whose forces were supported by the Condor Legion during a 1930s civil war. For ten points, name this Spanish dictator who ruled from 1939 to 1975.	ANSWER: Francisco FrancoBahamonde
In this war, Vulcan bombers were ordered to carry out 8000-mile long raids in Operation Black Buck. Controversy in this war arose when the submarineConquerorfired on a ship allegedly returning to port, theGeneral Belgrano. This war, which was prompted by Leopoldo Galtieri’s desire to distract his citizens from  his  country’s  economic  issues,  ended  after  two  months  in  1982.  For  ten  points,  name  this  war  in which the UK fought for a namesake island group that had been claimed by Argentina.	ANSWER: Falklands War (acceptSouthAtlanticWar; acceptMalvinasWar) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
This woman’s unstable financial situation late in life led Daniel Webster to send her goods through this woman’s former slave, Paul Jennings, and caused her to sell her family’s plantation, Montpelier. This woman  and  Jean  Pierre  Sioussat  ensured  the  safety  of  a  copy  of  Gilbert  Stuart’sLansdowne Portrait during the hurried evacuation of the White House in 1814. For ten points, name this First Lady, the wife of James Madison.	ANSWER: DolleyPayne  ToddMadison(accept  “Dolley”  alone  after  “Madison”  is  read;  prompt  on (D.) Madison before mentioned)
This country’s Special Period of deprivation and economic depression began in 1989, after the loss of Eastern Bloc backing. This country’s Sierra Maestra mountains have been the site of many guerilla wars, including against the American-supported Fulgencio Batista who fled to the Dominican Republic after he was deposed. Che Guevara helped the communists take power in, for ten points, what island country that has been governed by the Castros since 1959?	ANSWER: Cuba
Early  versions  of  this  system  used  “eka-”  and  other  Sanskrit  prefixes  for  entries  that  had  been predicted  but  not  yet  discovered.  The  “law  of  octaves”  was  developed  by  John  Newlands  in  an  early attempt to create this system, which Lothar Meyer subdivided into six families based on valence. Glenn Seaborg  revised  this  system  with  the  “actinide  concept.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  system  that  uses increasing atomic number to organize the elements, first designed by Dmitri Mendeleev.	ANSWER: periodictableof elements
A ruler of this city obtained knowledge by communing with the muse Egeria. According to tradition, the doors of a temple in this city were closed during times of peace and opened during times of war. The legendary  founder  of  this  city  was  a  son  of  Rhea  Silvia  who,  as  an  infant,  was  sentenced  to  death  by Amulius. For ten points, name this city, home to the Temple of Janus, where Jupiter was worshiped in the capital of an ancient empire.	ANSWER: Rome
This state’s governor, Evan Mecham, raised a national furor by canceling Martin Luther King Day in  1987;  he  was  impeached  for  obstruction  of  justice  in  1988.  A  senator  from  this  state  gave  a  speech declaring that “extremism in defense of liberty is no vice” and was targeted by the “Daisy Ad.” Another senator from this state lost a presidential election after nominating Sarah Palin as his vice president. For ten points, name this state represented in the Senate by Barry Goldwater and John McCain.	ANSWER: Arizona Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
This man’s regent, Sophia Alekseyevna, listened to his meetings through a hole in his throne and led a revolt that forced this leader to disband the Streltsy. This man learned Dutch shipbuilding techniques on his “Great Embassy” tour of Europe. He reorganized the Table of Ranks to weaken the Boyars, and he taxed long beards as part of his reform efforts. For ten points, name this westernizing Russian tsar.	ANSWER:PetertheGreat(orPeterI)
This  route  was  extensively  used  by  the  Peoria  Party,  a  group  of  advocates  for  colonization.  The Bartleson-Bidwell Group was among the first to use this route after leaving Fort Hall. This route branched off in Montana and Utah via the Bozeman and Mormon trails. An iconic Learning Company game named for this route often ends with the player dying of dysentery, a fate that befell many travelers that took this trail to the Willamette Valley. For ten points, name this trail that settlers used to reach the Pacific Northwest.	ANSWER: OregonTrail
This case’s outcome was slammed in Byron White’s dissent, who claimed it “fashions and announces a  new  constitutional right.” This  case,  in  which  Harry  Blackmun  cited  a  “compelling state  interest” as necessary  to  regulate  privacy,  affirmed  a  trimester  framework.  The  initially  anonymous  plaintiff  in  this case, Norma McCorvey, later became a pro-life activist. For ten points, name this 1973 Supreme Court case that legalized abortion.	ANSWER: Roev. Wade
This  practice  was  banned  by  Lord  Mansfield’s  ruling  in  Somersett’s  case,  which  found  that  it  had never  been  legal  in  England  and  Wales.  In  Brazil,  this  institution  was  abolished  when  Princess  Isabel signed the Golden Law. Juneteenth is a celebration of the end of this practice, and Maroons were people that escaped it. For ten points, name this institution that was ended in much of the United States by the Emancipation Proclamation.	ANSWER: slavery
Samuel  Davies,  a  prominent  leader  of  one  of  these  movements,  worked  predominantly  with  slaves and later became President of Princeton. A conflict in one of these movements centered on a rift between “New Lights” and “Old Lights.” Jonathan Edwards’ “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God” sermon was delivered during the first of, for ten points, what periods of religious fervor across the United States in both the 1730s and the 19th century?	ANSWER: GreatAwakenings (accept either theFirstand/orSecondGreatAwakenings) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
This man’s son Ernak became the last ruler of his people after another of this man’s sons died at the Battle of Nedao. Thefoederaticombined forces with Flavius Aetius and Theodoric to defeat this man at the Catalaunian Plains. In 452, Leo I successfully convinced this man to call off his invasion of Italy. The titleFlagellum  Deiwas a epithet given to this man that translates to “Scourge of God.” For ten points, name this leader of the Huns.	ANSWER: Attilathe Hun
One politician with this last name campaigned with a giant steel ball that rolled 5,000 miles across the country. Slogans written on that ball noted that “Old Allegany [...] started the ball” for a politician of this last name who defeated the incumbent Martin Van Buren, and that “in ‘88 [...] we roll it on for Gallant Ben,” his grandson. For ten points, give this surname shared by Benjamin and William Henry, a pair of 19th century Presidents.	ANSWER:Harrison(accept Benjamin and/or William HenryHarrison)
A composer from this country wrote a Rondo forAbdelazarthat was used as the theme for a piece that  taught  instruments  to  children,A  Young  Person’s  Guide  to  the  Orchestra.  Another  musician  from this country wrote the forty-voice motetSpem in Aliumand the melody to aFantasiaby Ralph [RAFE] Vaughan Williams. Thomas Tallis and Henry Purcell, were from, for ten points, what country where the folk song “Greensleeves” was supposedly written by King Henry VIII?	ANSWER:England(acceptUnitedKingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland;  accept  Great Britain)
Life under this leader is depicted in the opening chapters of the novelThe Three-Body Problem. This leader’s wife wrote a series of Eight Model Dramas, includingThe Legend of the Red LanternandThe Red Detachment of Women. This ruler wrote that “Imperialism and All Reactionaries Are Paper Tigers” in a book of quotations. For ten points, name this author of theLittle  Red  Bookwho instituted the Cultural Revolution in China.	ANSWER: MaoZedong(accept either underlined portion)
In this state, Native Americans established the regional capital of Tahlequah in a territory granted by the Treaty of New Echota. The Unassigned Lands were originally designated for Native Americans in this state, which was the destination of the Cherokees who migrated westward during the Trail of Tears. For ten points, name this state where eager participants in an 1889 land rush, called “Sooners,” snapped up land between Norman and Tulsa.	ANSWER: Oklahoma Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
This war’s French theater included a victory for the Duc d’Enghien[”duke”don-GYEN] at the Battle of Rocroi[roh-CWAH]. The Bohemian phase of this war ended with the Battle of White Mountain and the defeat of the Winter King. Wallenstein and the Count of Tilly served as Imperial generals during this war, in which Gustavus Adolphus was killed. The Peace of Westphalia ended, for ten points, what war fought over religion in modern-day Germany that lasted from 1618 to 1648?	ANSWER: ThirtyYears’ War
The  first  edition  of  this  publication  depicted  Speaker  Joseph  Cannon.  It  was  founded  by  Briton Hadden and Henry Luce, and it has often depicted men with a red “X” on their faces after their deaths. This publication named Albert Einstein the Person of the Century and declared “You” the Person of the Year in 2006. For ten points, name this magazine that is famous for featuring single people on its cover, featuring a bright red border.	ANSWER: TimeMagazine
Margaret Thatcher claimed to have carried a copy of this man’s most famous work in her handbag at all times. This thinker rejects the “benevolence of the butcher, baker, and brewer” as the reason that dinner  is  expected  and,  in  his  most  famous  work,  describes  a  metaphor  about  the  unintended  social benefits of private, selfish actions as the “invisible hand.” For ten points, name this Scottish “Father of Economics,” the author ofThe Wealth of Nations.	ANSWER: Adam Smith
This modern-day nation was dominated by the Chola Dynasty until its liberation by Vijayabahu I, who re-established Buddhism. Its native Kingdom of Kandy was dominated by the Dutch and conquered by  the  British,  who  grew  tea  in  their  colony  of  Ceylon.  The  majority  Sinhalese  fought  with  the  Tamil Tigers on, for ten points, what island off the coast of India?	ANSWER: SriLanka(acceptCeylonuntil mention)
The “Buena Vista Tract” in this city features streets named for Mexican War generals. To make room for this city’s Civic Arena, many blocks of its African-American Hill District were demolished. This city’s Point State Park preserves the site of a fort that was targeted by General Braddock in the French and Indian War. Fort Duquesne [do-kane] was built at the confluence of the Monogahela and Allegheny Rivers in what is now, for ten points, what city in western Pennsylvania?	ANSWER:Pittsburgh Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
Rather  than  initially  perform  this  action,  Kantaro  Suzuki  decided  to  respond  to  an  ultimatum  by “killing  it  with  silence,”  or  mokusatsu.  Commemorations  of  this  action  are  held  on  August  15th  and September 2nd, recognizing either the Jewel Voice Broadcast or the official signing of documents on board the USSMissouri. For ten points, name this event that ended fighting in World War II, four months after a similar event in Germany.	ANSWER: the surrenderofJapanin World War II (acceptV-JDay orVictoryin/over/etc.Japan Day; accept equivalent descriptions; prompt on descriptions of the end of World War II before mentioned)
The  production  of  this  item  names  a  group  of  18th  century  nationalist  revolutionaries  in  Italy. During the Industrial Revolution, the complete deforestation of Britain may have been prevented when blacksmiths replaced this item with coke. A companion company founded by Henry Ford produced this good out of byproducts from its car manufacturing; that company is now called Kingsford. For ten points, name this hot-burning, wood-based, solid carbon fuel, commonly used in blacksmith forges and barbecue grills.	ANSWER: charcoal(prompt on Carbonari)
This ruler resolved territorial disputes with Nader Shah by signing the Treaty of Resht and failed to form an alliance with William III. This man employed Patrick Gordon to capture Azov, which he later gave back to Ahmed III. He gave civil service a structured hierarchy via the Table of Ranks as part of an effort to reform the bureaucracy, and he disbanded the streltsy. The boyars lost both political power and their beards under the reign of, for ten points, what “Great” modernizing tsar of Russia?	ANSWER:PetertheGreatorPeterI(prompt on Peter)
This action has been successfully completed at Fra Mauro and the Ocean of Storms. The inability of the Zond program to finish a successful mission doomed Soviet efforts to even attempt this action. A speech delivered at Rice University in 1962 claimed that America chooses to do this “and do the other things not because they are easy, but because they are hard.” For ten points, name this accomplishment achieved by 12 Americans, first performed in 1969 by Buzz Aldrin and Neil Armstrong duringApollo 11.	ANSWER: landing on theMoon(accept equivalent descriptions, likesendingpeopletotheMoon orgoingtotheMoon; prompt on more general answers, like “space travel”; do not accept or prompt on Apollo)
One  war  in  this  state  began  with  an  attack  on  Fort  Myers,  while  another  was  triggered  by  the Dade Massacre. This state, purchased as part of the Adams-Onis Treaty, was home to a Native American tribe led by Osceola that fought Winfield Scott and Andrew Jackson. The Seminole Wars were fought in, for ten points, what southern U.S. state where the Spanish founded St. Augustine on the peninsula and Pensacola on the panhandle?	ANSWER: Florida Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
Donald  Trump  recently  claimed  that  this  organization  had  opened  a  hotel  and  that  he  was  “in competition with them.” This group was driven out of Tikrit after massacring unarmed Air Force cadets at Camp Speicher. The Bataclan was targeted by this group in a November 2015 attack in Paris. For ten points,  name  this  extremist  Islamic  terrorist  group  that  arose  from  an  offshoot  of  Al-Qaeda  and  which controls territory in Iraq and Syria.	ANSWER: IslamicStateof  Iraq  and  Syria  (orIslamicStateof  Iraq  and  the  Levant;  acceptISIS, ISIL, orIS; acceptDaesh)
This man led the fleet that claimed Cayo Hueso, later known as Key West. He threatened gunboat diplomacy at Uraga with a fleet of four gunboats; in ensuing discussion, he broke the isolationist policy of sakoku. The Convention of Kanagawa was signed by, for ten points, what American commodore who opened trade with Japan?	ANSWER: MatthewPerry
Carlo Maderno expanded the nave of a building in this city. A fountain in this city includes a dove representing the Pamphili family atop an Egyptian obelisk that overlooks the fountain’s depiction of four rivers. An amphitheatre in this city was built during the Flavian dynasty near the site of chariot racing at the Circus Maximus. For ten points, name the city that contains St. Peter’s Basilica and the Colosseum.	ANSWER: Rome(prompt on Vatican City)
After  winning  the  Battle  of  Gonzales,  this  region  entered  a  war  with  its  southern  neighbor.  One President of this region, Mirabeau Lamar, created the almost worthless “redback” to combat debt. This region used the Lone Star flag and lost the Battle of the Alamo. For ten points, name this region where Stephen Austin and Sam Houston lived, now a large American state.	ANSWER: Texas(accept Republic ofTexas)
This writer compared journalists with prostitutes in his exposeThe Brass Check. In another book by this man, the protagonist’s wife Ona is raped by Phil Connor, and its Lithuanian protagonist attending a Socialist rally; that book caused this author to claim “I aimed for the public’s heart, and by accident hit it in the stomach.” Jurgis Rudkus works in an unsanitary meatpacking plant in, for ten points, what muckracking author’sThe Jungle?	ANSWER: Upton Sinclair
This  civilization’s  early  kings  include  two  of  the  same  name  nicknamed  “the  fisherman”  and  “the shepherd.” Its first king, Alulim, ruled for 28,800 years according to its “King List,” written in cuneiform, an early form of writing developed in this civilization. For ten points, name this Mesopotamian civilization home to the cities of Lagash and Ur, whose mythical king, Gilgamesh, is also on the King List.	ANSWER:Sumeria Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 5
To extend its shoreline, this city built the Palm Jumeirah, just south of a set of hundreds of small artificial islands in the shape of the world. A three-lobed skyscraper in this city uses spiralling setbacks along its 160 floors. For ten points, name this most populous city in the United Arab Emirates, where oil revenue has spurred urban construction like the Burj Khalifa.	ANSWER:Dubai
This  person  proclaimed  “O  Time,  O  traditions”  in  delivering  a  speech  to  fend  off  the  Catiline Conspiracy. His hands were placed on the Rostrum and Fulvia pierced this man’s tongue with a hairpin after  he  was  beheaded  on  the  orders  of  Marc  Antony,  whom  he  had  insulted  in  orations  inspired  by Demosthenes [deh-MOSS-theh-nees]. For ten points, name this famous Roman orator of the Philippics.	ANSWER: Marcus TulliusCicero
In this battle, Major Sylvain-Raynal managed to defend Fort Vaux for over a week, but the lightly defended  Fort  Douaumont[DOO-oh-MOHN]  was  captured  without  a  fight.  General  Nivelle  issued  the order  “they  shall  not  pass”  during  this  battle,  and  General  Falkenhyn  sought  to  “bleed  France  white” in this battle. For ten points, name this extremely bloody 9-month-long battle during World War I at a French fortress town.	ANSWER: Battle of Verdun
Dudley  Field  Malone  spoke  during  this  event,  which  was  promoted  by  Sue  Hicks  and  George Rappleyea,  who  organized  this  event  by  finding  a  violation  of  the  Butler  Act.  William  Jennings  Bryan faced  Clarence  Darrow  as  opposing  attorneys  in  this  case,  which  ended  with  Darrow  being  accused  of “slurring the Bible” and the defendant being given a $100 fine. For ten points, name this 1925 court case in which a Tennessee teacher was convicted of teaching evolution.	ANSWER: Scopes(Monkey) Trial
This thinker claimed that human motivation was divided between eros and thanatos, or  the  life  and  death  drives.  This  man  divided  the  title  constructs  into  manifest  and  latent content  in  his The Interpretation of Dreams.  This  thinker  divided  the  unconscious  into  the ego, superego, and the id. Controversially claiming that young men develop an Oedipal [[ED- ih-"pull"]]  complex,  for  ten  points,  which  Austrian  psychologist  is  considered  the  father  of psychoanalysis?	ANSWER: Sigmund Freud (or Sigismund Schlomo Freud)
An  island  in  this  nation  owned  by  naval  officer  William  Owen  was  named by  him Campobello  in   an   effort   to   gain   favor   with   the   sitting   royal  governor,   Lord   William Campbell. The former mining town of Uranium City and many oil sands drilling sites are on the shore of this country's Lake Athabasca [[AH-thah-BAH-skah]]. In this nation, the SS Mont Blanc's collision with the SS Imo led to the deadly "Halifax Explosion" during the First World War. For ten points, name this North American country whose major cities include Ottawa and Montreal.	ANSWER: Canada
The story of this opera was adapted for a 1998 musical of the same name with music by Elton John. An original "potpourri" overture was written for this opera, though it was cut from the 1871 premiere in Cairo. At the end of this opera, the title Ethiopian princess dies in the arms of her lover Radamès [[rah-dah-MESS]], while priests sing hymns to Ptah. For ten points,  name  this  four-act  opera  by  Giuseppe  Verdi  about  a  romantic  tragedy  in  the  Old Kingdom of Egypt.	ANSWER: Aida
A  1942  movie  musical  titled  for  this  song  follows the  life  of  George  M.  Cohan.  The Marquis de Lafayette’s band played this song as the British surrendered at Yorktown. In this song, the title character and his father “went down to Camp” with Captain Gooding and saw “men and boys / As thick as hasty pudding.” For ten points, name this song about an American who “stuck a feather in his cap / And called it macaroni.”	ANSWER: “Yankee Doodle” (accept "Yankee Doodle Dandy")  2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 6
In 1982, two laid-off Chrysler workers killed a man of this ethnic group in Highland Park, Michigan due to their anger at their company being outcompeted by the Japanese auto industry.  This  people  group,  who  were  killed  en  masse  in  the  Rock  Springs  Massacre, experienced   California's   discriminatory   Anti-Coolie   Act.   An   1882   "Exclusion   Act" was passed  to  limit  immigration  by,  for  ten  points,  what  Asian  ethnic  group,  many  of  whom immigrated during the late Qing [[CHING]] Dynasty?	ANSWER: Chinese-Americans (prompt on "Asian" or "Asian-American" before mentioned)
Two  students  from  this  institution  began  the  St.  Scholastica  Day  Riot  after  being served  poor  quality  wine.  Rhodes  Scholars  are  given  full-rides  to  this  university,  which initially grew after Henry II banned his countrymen from attending the University of Paris. Following  the  1209  lynching  of  two  students  from  this  institution,  many  scholars  left  to found  its  rival,  Cambridge.  For  the  point,  name  this  university,  the  oldest  in  the  English- speaking world.	ANSWER: University of Oxford (accept Oxford University)
One  of  these  people  was  convicted  in  the  case Tuckiar  v  The  King after  killing  a police  constable  who  assaulted  the  women  of  his  tribe  in  Arnhem's  Land.  Turn-of-the- century laws in New South Wales and the Northern Territory allowed for the removal of the children of these people, collectively known as the Stolen Generations. In 1985, ownership of the site Uluru was given back to, for ten points, what indigenous people of Australia?	ANSWER: Aboriginal Australians (or Aborigines)
American  explorer  Gene  Savoy  proved  that  this site  and  the  legendary  capital  of Manco  Yupanqui  [[yoo-PAHN-kee]]  Vilcabamba  were  distinct  locales.  A  sun  dial  served  as the centerpiece of this estate's Temple of Inti. This site, whose name translates to "old peak" in Quechua [[KEH-chwah]], likely served as the private estate of the Sapa Pachacuti. Hiram Bingham discovered, for ten points, what Incan citadel in the Andes of modern Peru?	ANSWER: Machu Picchu
A "Cantata" named for this river was written to commemorate a heroic last stand by fishermen  near  its  Hukou  [[HOO-KOO]]  Waterfall.  With  Hou  Ji  [[HOH-JEE]],  the  semi- mythical Emperor Yu the Great stopped this river from flooding by using self-expanding soil called Xirang [[ZHEE-RAHNG]].  The  Sui  [[SWEE]]  Dynasty  began  the  construction  of  the Grand Canal, connecting this river and the Yangtze River. For the point, name this "Mother River" of China, named for the color of its muddy water.	ANSWER: Yellow River (or Huáng hé [[HWAHNG HUH]])  2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 6
A mayor in this nation, Arturas Zuokas [[zoo-OH-kuss]], fought illegal parking in his city  by  crushing  a  car  with  an  armored  vehicle  in  2011.  This  nation's  language  was preserved  through  the  19th-century  "Book  Smuggling"  movement  after  Tsarist  Russia banned its use. This modern state merged with a southern neighbor in the Union of Lublin, and it joined Estonia and Latvia in the anti-Soviet Singing Revolution. For ten points, name this Baltic state that formed a historical Commonwealth with Poland.	ANSWER: Republic of Lithuania (accept Grandy Duchy of Lithuania; or Lietuvos Respublika; or Lietuva; accept Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth; accept Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania)   2021-22 C Set History Bowl - 2021-09-14  Round 6
This event ended when acting governor Thomas Hutchison promised a fair investigation into this event if the crowd watching the event dispersed. This event is depicted in a famous engraving by Paul Revere. John  Adams  defended  eight  soldiers  involved  in  this  event  that  led  to  the  death  of  a  black  dockworker named Crispus Attucks. For ten points, name this 1770 event in which British soldiers fired on a crowd, killing five unarmed citizens in the capital of Massachusetts.	ANSWER: BostonMassacre
In front of this structure while standing in a bucket crane, David Hasselhoff performed his hit song “Looking for Freedom” before thousands of activists in 1989. Peter Fechter was shot and killed along the “death strip” of this structure by guards on one side. A country on one side of this structure referred to it as the Anti-Fascist Protection Rampart. For ten points, name this structure which Ronald Reagan asked Mikhail Gorbachev to tear down while it still divided a German city.	ANSWER: BerlinWall
The Battle of Meloria began the decline of this city-state in favor of Genoa. This city had become powerful through the sacking of Palermo in 1063 and by helping drive the Saracens from Sardinia in 1016. Located  on  the  Arno,  six  miles  from  the  Ligurian  Sea,  this  city  was  once  considered  the  main  port  in Tuscany and is noted for its inclined campanile, or “leaning tower.” For ten points, name this Italian city.	ANSWER: Pisa
This man built a line of fortifications around Alesia to defeat Vercingetorix and demanded that his pirate captors ransom him for a higher sum of money. The phrase “the die is cast” was uttered by this lover  of  Cleopatra  before  he  crossed  the  Rubicon.  This  man’s  assumption  of  extraordinary  powers  was opposed by Cassius and Brutus. For ten points, name this member of the First Triumvirate and Roman dictator who was assassinated on the Ides of March.	ANSWER: Gaius JuliusCaesar
Jean Gerson helped resolve a crisis in this organization by rejecting two candidates to lead it, while Emperor  John  VIII  joined  the  Council  of  Ferrara-Florence  to  seek  the  aid  of  this  organization.  This organization was based out of Avignon with the support of Philip IV, but it moved back to its original home after the Council of Constance. This organization split with its Eastern counterpart in 1054 after an excommunication from the Ecumenical Patriarch. For ten points, name this organization headed by the Pope in Rome.	ANSWER: Roman CatholicChurch(prompt on Vatican, See of Rome, or Holy See) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 6
A 13-Point Program was issued by people of this nationality who founded the Chicago-based Young Lords.  At  the  Blair  House,  two  people  of  this  nationality  carried  out  a  failed  assassination  attempt  on Harry  Truman.  The  citizenship  rights  for  people  of  this  nationality  were  granted  in  the  Jones-Shafroth Act. By 1950, over 60,000 of these people lived in an area close to 110th Street in New York that became known  as  Spanish  Harlem.  For  ten  points,  what  is  this  nationality  given  to  people  from  an  American island Commonwealth in the Caribbean.	ANSWER: PuertoRican
In  one  of  these  events,  a  man  claims  that  he’ll  “watch  the  blood  flow”  before  asking  another  man “now who’s got that red coat.” In another of these events, one man claims that he “shook hands with both Ronalds / Reagan and McDonald’s” before telling Vladimir Putin and Joseph Stalin that that they need a shower. Abraham Lincoln slaps Donald Trump in his appearance in one of these events, which usually involve characters played by EpicLLOYD and NicePeter. For ten points, name these lyrical contests that make up a popular series on YouTube.	ANSWER: EpicRapBattlesofHistory(acceptERB)
This  agreement  was  formulated  after  one  country’s  failure  to  recapture  Saint-Domingue  in  a  slave revolt. The U.S. president behind this agreement sent Robert Livingston and James Monroe to negotiate it. That president later sent Lewis and Clark on an expedition examining the territorial gains from this agreement. For ten points, name this agreement under Thomas Jefferson that procured a large section of what is now the United States from France.	ANSWER: LouisianaPurchase
One of these events was witnessed by John Joseph Henry while imprisoned on the HMSPearlin New York Harbor in 1776. A shed on DeKoven Street was supposedly the first building destroyed in an 1871 event  of  this  type,  which  allegedly  began  when  Mrs.  O’Leary’s  cow  overturned  a  lantern.  In  2020,  the most damaging event of this type in U.S. history destroyed more than 4.4 million acres. For ten points, name these events, one of which caused much of Chicago to burn.	ANSWER: Wildfires
This  person  served  in  the  Auxiliary  Territorial  Service  during  World  War  Two  and  was  harshly criticized for being “out of touch” by John Grigg after the Suez Crisis. The term “annus horribilis” was used by this figure to describe a year in which two of her three children’s marriages ended and a fire broke out in Windsor Castle. This figure’s eldest child separated from his spouse due to Camilla Parker-Bowles. That son was Charles, the Prince of Wales. For ten points, name this longest reigning British monarch.	ANSWER: ElizabethII Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 6
A  funerary  work  from  this  civilization  shows  two  lovers  with  braided  hair,  embracing  and  smiling. The Sarcophagus of the Spouses was created by people in this civilization, as was the Chimera of Arezzo, which was later owned by the Medici family. This civilization, which was wrongly credited with creating the  Capitoline  Wolf,  produced  a  statue  of  Apollo  found  in  its  city  of  Veii.  For  ten  points,  name  this civilization in ancient Italy whose art influenced that of ancient Rome.	ANSWER: Etruscans
After  this  man  discovered  a  plan  by  King  Artag  to  betray  him,  he  invaded  Iberia  and  captured fortresses  like  Harmozica  and  Seusamora.  This  man  was  selected  to  replace  Lucius  Lucullus  in  a  war against  Mithridates  VI  of  Pontus.  Ptolemy  XIII  ordered  the  execution  of  this  man  after  Julius  Caesar defeated him at the Battle of Pharsalus. For ten points, name this Roman general that led the Optimates faction of the Roman Senate against Julius Caesar’s Populares.	ANSWER: Gnaeus PompeyMagnus (acceptPompeytheGreat)
This  politician  applied  his  namesake  doctrine  after  a  crisis  affecting  Camille  Chamoun’s  Lebanese government. During this man’s Presidency, Francis Gary Powers was shot down while on a reconnaissance mission, sparking the U2 Incident. This man’s foreign policy was spearheaded by his Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, who helped organize the Iranian coup of 1953. For ten points, name this President who previously served as a World War II general.	ANSWER: Dwight D. Eisenhower
In  1944,  this  man  reached  “ace  in  a  day”  status  by,  in  part,  scaring  a  German  pilot  into  crashing into his wingman. Two nights before his most famous feat, this man broke two ribs riding horses but only told his wife and friend Jack Ridley. This man, who named his planeGlamorous Glennisafter his wife, was dropped out of the bomb bay of a B-29 bomber in the experimental Bell X-1 in 1947. For ten points, name this first pilot to break the sound barrier.	ANSWER: Charles Elwood “Chuck” Yeager
While this leader was traveling in Australia, unknown assailants used a large wood log in an attempt to derail this leader’s train in the Lithgow Plot. Marcus Sargent fired six blank shots at this leader in 1981 during the Trooping the Colour ceremony. In the event of this person’s death, her government will carry out  Operation  London  Bridge.  This  queen  labeled  1992  her  “annus  horribilis”,  in  part  due  to  a  tell-all book by Princess Diana. For ten points, name this current Queen of England.	ANSWER: ElizabethII(prompt on Elizabeth) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
The  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  was  destroyed  by  Fatimid  forces  after  it  was  reported  that miraculous fire jumped onto these things. During the Havdalah ceremony, a braided one of these things is prayed over. Examples of these things with the letters Alpha and Omega are used on Easter in Roman Catholic churches. For ten points, name these objects that, during Chanukah, are held by menorahs and lit from right to left.	ANSWER: candles
Much of this battle took place at the Chalmette Plantation. Alexander Cochrane helped the losing side in this battle, which led to a siege of Fort St. Phillip. Edward Pakenham led the British in this battle against an army aided by the pirate Jean Lafitte. This battle took place two weeks after the Treaty of Ghent was signed. For ten points, name this victory for Andrew Jackson during the War of 1812, a defense of the most populous city in Louisiana.	ANSWER: Battle ofNewOrleans
The  1912  S ́aenz  Pena  Law  in  Argentina  made  this  action  mandatory,  a  policy  that  was  first implemented  in  Belgium  in  1893.  Arrow’s  Impossibility  Theorem  explains  a  problem  with  this  action when it involves more than two possible options. In 1872, Susan B. Anthony was arrested in Rochester for committing this action, which was addressed by the 19th Amendment. For ten points, name this action through which citizens choose candidates on Election Day.	ANSWER: voting(accept word forms; accept elaborations, like mandatoryvoting; prompt on similar equivalents, like “(participating in) elections” before “election” is read)
An ancient civilization in this modern-day country left the Anitta Text, outlining how the title leader defeated the last king of Zalpuwa. The 1950s Dorak Affair concerned James Mellaart smuggling artifacts from this country after working on the Neolithic city of C ̧ atalh ̈oy ̈uk[chat-ul-HOY-ook]. Another discovery in  this  nation  was  uncovered  by  Heinrich  Schliemann  at  Hisarlik  six  miles  from  the  Dardanelles  Strait. For ten points, name this modern-day country where the ancient ruins of Troy are found.	ANSWER: Turkey
Poor wording in this legislation allowed swindlers to interpret a 12 by 14 requirement to be in inches rather than feet. The 1934 Taylor Grazing Act severely curtailed this legislation. This act was supported by the Timer Culture Act, which gave additional benefits in exchange for planting trees. This act allowed settlers to purchase 160 acres of public land for the cost of a filing fee. For ten points, name this 1862 act that promoted westward expansion.	ANSWER: HomesteadAct Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
This politician was dogged by accusations of an affair with Nan Britton. The Four Power Treaty was signed when this man called the Washington Naval Conference to limit arms. This man, who appointed the first Cabinet member to go to prison, died of a cerebral hemorrhage before the Teapot Dome scandal was brought to light. For ten points, name this US president who promised a “return to normalcy” and was succeeded by Calvin Coolidge.	ANSWER: Warren Harding
Members of this group in Shanghai organized a seven-day camp at the Moganshan resort. The motto “Blood and Honor” was adopted by this group, which was led by Baldur von Schirach and Artur Axmann. Volkssturmcommonly drafted members of this group, one unit of which assisted theKriegsmarine. An organization similar to this one that was only open to women was the League of German Girls. For ten points, name this organization consisting of boys who assisted the Nazi effort.	ANSWER: HitlerYouth(acceptHitlerjugend)
An  obelisk  in  this  location  includes  bas-reliefs  of  eight  historical  moments  and  proclaims  “Eternal glory to the heroes of the people.” While covering an event in this location, a thrown rock nearly killed photographer Jeff Widener. This location’s Great Hall of the People contained a banquet hall that Richard Nixon visited during a 1972 visit. A man was shown standing in front of a tank in a photo taken during a 1989 protest in this location. For ten points, name this square in Beijing.	ANSWER: TiananmenSquare(prompt on Tiananmen; prompt on Beijing before mentioned)
In  this  country,  Edward  Wilmot  Blyden  was  a  pioneering  professor  and  diplomat.  The  True  Whig Party  allied  with  Firestone  Rubber  to  dominate  this  country’s  politics  for  a  century.  William  Tubman and Joseph Jenkins Roberts served as presidents of this country, which has a capital named for the fifth American  president.  For  ten  points,  name  this  West  African  country  founded  by  freed  slaves  from  the United States.	ANSWER: Liberia
Bertrand  Russell  argued  against  this  concept  by  postulating  a  teapot  orbiting  the  sun.  Anselm of  Canterbury  contended  that  this  concept’s  definition  necessitated  its  existence,  the  first  so-called “ontological” argument for this concept. Thomas Aquinas wrote “five ways” to demonstrate this concept, including an argument from a “first cause.” For ten points, name this concept of a supreme being that is worshiped by monotheists.	ANSWER: the existence of God Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
The McCone Commission investigated a set of riots in this city that were sparked by the arrest of Marquette Frye. This city’s mayor, Tom Bradley, tried to calm tensions during another riot in this city that  is  called  “429”  by  its  Korean  inhabitants.  The  1965  Watts  Riots  struck,  for  ten  points,  what  city where the beating of Rodney King and acquittal of the policemen responsible led to a 1992 riot?	ANSWER:LosAngeles(orLA)
An article in theNew York Tribuneinformed the composer of this piece that he was busy working on it, a complete surprise to him. This piece, which premiered at New York City’s Aeolian Hall on Abraham Lincoln’s birthday in 1924 with its composer on the piano, opens with a glissando on the clarinet. For ten points, name this fusion of classical music and jazz, a musical piece by George Gershwin.	ANSWER: RhapsodyinBlue
Fear of rebellion motivated this colony’s elite to establish a Slave Code in 1705 that hardened the race  line  in  this  colony.  John  Punch  was  enslaved  in  this  colony  and  was  the  first  documented  African slave  in  the  English  colonies.  A  rebellion  in  this  colony  against  William  Berkeley  united  African  slaves and English servants under Nathaniel Bacon. For ten points, name this plantation-based colony where, in 1676, Jamestown was burned to the ground.	ANSWER: Virginia
During  this  war,  Lord  Salisbury  held  a  “khaki  election”  named  for  the  newly-introduced  army uniforms.  Sir  Arthur  Conan  Doyle  volunteered  as  a  doctor  in  this  war,  in  which  Robert  Baden  Powell outlasted a 217-day siege at Mafeking. The all-women Fawcett Commission investigated the British use of concentration camps in this war, which was incited by Leander Starr Jameson’s raid. For ten points, name this turn of the 20th-century war between Britain and Dutch Afrikaners.	ANSWER: Second BoerWar
In a short story from this country, Tacha’s cow dies in a flash flood; that story is titled “It’s because we  are  very  poor.”  In  a  novel  from  this  country,  everyone  in  the  central  town  dies  because  of  the  title man’s  refusal  to  harvest  his  crops.  Another  novel  from  this  country  centers  on  the  death  of  Ambrose Bierce  in  this  country’s  civil  war;  that  novel,  by  the  author  ofThe Death of Artemio Cruz,  isThe Old Gringo. For ten points, name this home country of Juan Rulfo and Carlos Fuentes.	ANSWER: Mexico Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
Many  people  fled  this  event  on  boats  whose  high  passenger  mortality  rates  inspired  the  nickname “coffin ships.” During this event, the phrase “taking the soup” was used to refer to families who accepted charity in exchange for converting to the Protestant faith. Robert Peel repealed the Corn Laws to provide relief for those impacted by, for ten points, what 1840s disaster caused by aphytophthora[FI-toe-THO-rah] blight of a certain crop?	ANSWER: IrishPotatoFamine(accept theGreatFamine; accept theGreatHunger; prompt on partial answers)
This composer quoted “Come, my dearest, why so sad this morning,” in a piece written to benefit wounded Serbian soldiers in 1876. This composer celebrated Romanov imperialism with the polonaise that ends hisSymphony no. 3, “Polish.” This composer of theMarche Slaveused “La Marseillaise” to represent Napoleon’s invading army in an overture that, when played in the US, often accompanies fireworks. For ten points, name this Russian composer who included cannons in his1812 Overture.	ANSWER: Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky
At  age  21,  this  man  founded  a  group  modeled  on  English  coffeehouses  called  the  Junto.  After partnering  with  Hugh  Meredith,  this  man  founded  a  short-lived  publication  that  was  the  first  German language paper in America. In an essay titledThe Way of Wealth, this man claimed that “There are no gains without pains,” one of many maxims collected in an annual series that ran from 1732 to 1758 under the namePoor Richard’s Almanac. For ten points, name this Founding Father on the $100 bill.	ANSWER: Benjamin Franklin
This body of water is home to the Isla del Sol and the Isla de la Luna, each of which contain ruins of  a  15th-century  civilization  that  flourished  around  its  shores.  Amantani  Island  is  located  on  this  lake and is currently home to thousands of Quechua-speaking peoples. This lake was viewed as sacred by the Incans, and is described as the highest navigable lake in the world. For ten points, name this lake that straddles the Bolivia-Peru border and is the largest lake in South America.	ANSWER: Lake Titicaca
This province’s Quiet Revolution secularized society in the 1960s. The Meech Lake and Charlottetown Accords  tried  to  better  integrate  this  province  with  its  country.  A  1995  referendum  narrowly  rejected independence for this province, where a 1970 crisis required the first peacetime use of the War Measures Act  after  the  FLQ  kidnapped  Pierre  Laporte  in  Montreal.  For  ten  points,  name  this  French-speaking Canadian province.	ANSWER: Quebec Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
Robert La Follette believed that his Senate office was burgled because he led an investigation into this event. The Supreme Court ruled Congress could compel testimony in a case about this event, which Attorney General Harry Daugherty was accused of not investigating. This scandal revolved around Edward Doheny and Harry Sinclair’s bribing of Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall for contracts to oil fields in Wyoming. For ten points, name this scandal that plagued Warren Harding’s administration in 1922.	ANSWER: TeapotDomescandal
At the end of his life, Marcus Aurelius told those around him “weep not for me; think rather” of those affected by one of these disasters; that disaster began during the reign of Antoninus Pius and is sometimes named after Galen. The port of Piraeus[pi-ray-us] is the estimated starting point of one of these disasters that began in 430 BC in Athens. Under Justinian, over 20 million people were killed in one of these that was caused byYersinia pestis. Bubonic is a type of, for ten points, what type of widely-spreading disease?	ANSWER:plagues (accept AntoninePlague; acceptPlagueof Galen; acceptPlagueof Athens; accept Plagueof Justinian; accept bubonicplague)
This event may have been called out of anger over Urban VIII’s presentation as Simplicio inDialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems. After this event, the central figure allegedly said “and yet it moves,” a refusal to accept this event’s result. This event began with the accusation of teaching a “false doctrine” “that the Sun is the center of the world.” The Roman Inquisition carried out, for ten points, what 17th century affair over an Italian astronomer’s heliocentrism?	ANSWER: the trialofGalileoGalilei (accept additional information; prompt on partial answers, such as “heliocentrism trial” or “Galileo’s house arrest”)
In  this  city’s  Kew  Garden  area,  38  neighbors  allegedly  watched  Winston  Moseley  murder  Kitty Genovese.  In  1989,  Matias  Reyes  committed  a  crime  in  this  city  but  only  confessed  in  2002,  well  after full-page  ads  demanding  the  death  penalty  were  made  by  Donald  Trump.  The  Son  of  Sam  murdered people during the summer of 1976 in, for ten points, what city whose police wrongly caught the Central Park Five?	ANSWER: NewYorkCity (orNYC)
Two  answers  required.  These  two  people  criticized  critical  reformers  of  Christianity,  particularly Bruno  Bauer,  in  a  book  titledThe Holy Family.  The  League  of  the  Just  asked  these  two  people  to collaborate  on  an  1848  pamphlet  that  opens  by  stating  “a  specter  is  haunting  Europe”  and  studies the  history  of  class  struggles.  For  ten  points,  name  these  German  philosophers,  the  co-authors  ofThe Communist Manifesto.	ANSWER: Karl Marxand FriedrichEngels(accept in either order; prompt on partial answer) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
According to legend, Henry I died by eating too  much of this food. The Scania market featured a Hanseatic League monopoly on this food. The United Kingdom and Iceland fought a so-called war over one type of this food. Garum was a Roman sauce made from these animals, which are harvested off the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. For ten points, name these animals, a primary food source in Scandinavia, that can be caught with a net or rod and reel.	ANSWER: fish(acceptlampreys, saltfish,herring,cod,fishsauce, or any other type of fish)
This man ordered the building of a torture chamber with a beautiful exterior, known as his “hell.” This man’s son, Mahinda, was sent on a proselytizing mission, and this man had the Mahabodhi Temple built. This ruler built a structure, currently located in the Sarnath Museum, which is topped by four lions; that column is inscribed with this man’s moral edicts. For ten points, name this grandson of Chandragupta Maurya, a devout Buddhist convert who ruled India in the 3rd century BC.	ANSWER: Ashokathe Great
Soldiers attacking this capital city during Operation Danube were deceived into thinking they were operating  against  fascist  elements.  In  protest  of  human  rights  abuses,  Jan  Palach  set  himself  on  fire  in this city’s Wenceslas Square. A meeting in this city led to the the removal of Antonin Novotny as First Secretary and the ascension of Alexander Dub ̆cek [doob-check], who began a series of liberalizing reforms. For  ten  points,  identify  this  namesake  of  a  1968  “Spring”  uprising  against  Communism,  the  capital  of Czechoslovakia.	ANSWER:Prague
The  only  casualty  during  this  expedition  was  suffered  when  appendicitis  killed  Charles  Floyd. Participants  of  this  event  were  assisted  by  Cameahwait[kam-eh-wait],  a  Shoshone[sho-SHO-nee]  chief who was the brother of another participant. An interpreter named Toussaint Charbonneau accompanied this expedition with his wife, Sacagawea. For ten points, name this expedition, undertaken from 1804 to 1806 by the Corps of Discovery, that explored the Louisiana Territory.	ANSWER: LewisandClarkExpedition  (orCorpsofDiscoverybefore  mention;  prompt  on descriptions of “exploration of the Louisiana Purchase” before it is said)
Description  acceptable.  In  2003,  the  University  of  Washington  fired  football  coach  Rick  Neuheisel [nu-hi-zel]  for  engaging  in  this  activity.  An  open  challenge  to  complete  this  process  perfectly  for  a  one billion dollar prize was instituted in 2014 by Warren Buffett. President Obama has been criticized for his “chalk” in this process, which he does on an annual ESPN special called Barack-etology. For ten points, name this annual activity of attempting to predict the results of a premier college basketball tournament.	ANSWER:  filling  out  a bracketfor  theNCAAmen’s  basketballtournament(accept  equivalent descriptions, includingMarchMadnessin place of “NCAA tournament”; prompt on gambling; prompt on partial answers) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
This body of water names Joshua Barney’s flotilla of barges that fought in the Battle of Bladensburg. For almost a century until the 1950s, pirates fought a ban on dredging mollusks in this bay in the “Oyster Wars.”  The  Comte  de  Grasse  defeated  the  British  in  a  1781  battle  at  the  mouth  of  this  bay,  which  is fed  by  the  York  and  Susquehanna  Rivers  and  traversed  by  a  bridge-tunnel  that  connects  the  Hampton Roads area to the Delmarva Peninsula. For ten points, name this large bay that is shared by Virginia and Maryland, the largest estuary in the United States.	ANSWER: ChesapeakeBay
Tsali led attacks on federal soldiers during this event. Winfield Scott was ordered to start this event and allowed John Ross, a member of the Treaty Party, to supervise it. The legal basis for this event, the Treaty  of  New  Echota,  was  signed  by  Major  Ridge  after  a  gold  rush  in  Dahlonega[duh-LAW-nuh-ga], Georgia. For ten points, name this forced relocation of the Cherokee, Seminole, and other Native American tribes during the 19th century.	ANSWER: TrailofTears(accept  descriptions  of  “the  removal  of  Native  Americans  from  their  land” until “Native American” is read)
When this man was transferred to Temple Number 7 in Harlem in 1954, his prot ́eg ́e Louis Farrakhan replaced  him  in  Boston.  This  man  controversially  claimed  that  the  assassination  of  JFK  represented “chickens  coming  home  to  roost  and  claimed  that  violence  may  be  necessary  in  the  “Ballot  or  the Bullet” speech. For ten points, name this civil rights leader, a critic of Martin Luther King, Jr., who was assassinated in 1965 after leaving the Nation of Islam.	ANSWER: MalcolmX(or el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz; accept MalcolmLittle)
This state’s “jungle primaries” allow political parties to list multiple candidates. In 2016, David Duke announced his candidacy for this state’s Senate seat. John Bel Edwards was elected governor of this state in 2015, succeeding the term-limited incumbent, Bobby Jindal. In summer 2016, FEMA declared disaster areas in 20 of this state’s parishes. For ten points, name this Southern U.S. state where August 2016 flash flooding devastated the capital, Baton Rouge.	ANSWER: Louisiana
This artistic medium was historically manufactured on the island of Murano in Venice. Dale Chihuly primarily works in this medium, which was used to create four pyramids for the courtyard of the Louvre by  I.M.  Pei.  A  colored  type  of  this  medium  was  used  by  Louis  Comfort  Tiffany  for  a  series  of  ornate lamps, as well as in the windows of Chartres Cathedral. For ten points, identify this sand-based artistic medium, often used in “stained” windows.	ANSWER: glass(accept blownglass, stainedglass, etc.) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
The  “Twin  Sister”  cannons  were  used  in  this  battle,  in  which  Deaf  Smith  was  ordered  to  destroy Vince’s  Bridge  during  this  battle  and  Mirabeau  Lamar  provided  reinforcements.  The  rallying  cries “Remember  Goliad”  and  “Remember  the  Alamo”  were  used  at  this  battle,  where  Santa  Anna  was captured. Sam Houston won, for ten points, what twenty-minute battle that ended the Mexican-American War?	ANSWER: Battle of SanJacinto
This leader ordered the execution of Raynald de Chatillon[sha-tee-YOHN]. King Baldwin IV repelled an  attack  from  this  man  at  the  Battle  of  Montgisard[mohn-gee-SAHR].  He  was  also  defeated  in  the Battle of Arsuf after the winning side had sieged Acre[AH-kur]. This founder of the Ayyubid Dynasty captured Jerusalem after the Battle of Hattin, which prompted the Third Crusade. For ten points, name this Muslim Kurdish ruler whose main enemy was Richard the Lionhearted.	ANSWER: Saladin(orSalahad-DinYusuf ibn Ayyub)
One side’s attack on Saarbrucken early in this war showed the value of their Chassepot[sha-say-poh] rifles, but was defeated at the Battle of Wissembourg[VISS-em-boorg]. The Army of Chalons was formed during this war to rescue troops encircled at Metz, and this war was ended by the Treaty of Frankfurt. The Second Empire was dissolved after a defeat at Sedan in this war. For ten points, name this war that resulted in the formation of the German Empire and the defeat of Napoleon III.	ANSWER: Franco-PrussianWar (acceptFranco-GermanWar; acceptWarof1870)
Benjamin  Chavis  directed  one  event  in  this  city  that  ended  its  program  with  Atonement  and Reconciliation.  A.  Phillip  Randolph  and  John  Lewis  were  two  of  the  “Big  Six”  that  organized  an event  in  this  city  that  advocated  for  “Jobs  and  Freedom.”  Jacob  Coxey  led  an  “Army”  that  protested unemployment by walking to this city. For ten points, name this city where Martin Luther King, Jr. gave his “I Have a Dream” speech on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.	ANSWER: WashingtonD.C. or theDistrict ofColumbia
This body of water’s southern shore was home to the Achaemenid province of Hyrcania. Astrakhan lies  on  a  river  delta  that  empties  into  this  body  of  water,  where  demand  for  caviar  has  caused  the Beluga sturgeon to be overfished. The world’s first offshore oil platform was built in this sea near Baku, Azerbaijan. For ten points, name this salty inland sea, considered the largest lake in the world.	ANSWER: CaspianSea Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 6
James Monroe was one of only two Americans wounded during this battle. The losing commander at this engagement ignored a message urging him to build fortifications found in his pocket after his death here; that commander was Johann Rall. The winning commander of this battle withdrew to prepare for the ensuing Battle of Princeton. For ten points, name this 1776 battle fought in New Jersey where, on Christmas night, George Washington’s troops crossed the Delaware River.	ANSWER: Battle of Trenton
This man’s death was most likely in revenge of his killing of Jesus Herrera. His defeat at the Battle of Celaya by Alvaro Obregon led him to escape to Chihuahua. The assassination of Francesco Madero led this man to form a military band known as the Division of the North. This man’s raid in Columbus led an unsuccessful expedition by John Pershing to capture him. For ten points, name this early 20th century Mexican bandit.	ANSWER:PanchoVilla
Edwin Stanton and Abraham Lincoln were lawyers for John Manny, who was sued by this man for patent infringement. In 1902, this man’s company merged with the Deering Harvester Company to create the International Harvester Company. This man is credited with inventing a device that harvested grain using moving blades on a platform. For ten points, name this inventor of the mechanical reaper.	ANSWER: Cyrus McCormick
A  five  member  team  including  Albert  Gallatin  and  Henry  Clay  negotiated  this  treaty,  whose unenforced ninth article was supposed to restore land to Native Americans. This treaty ended a war that led  to  the  dissolution  of  the  Federalist  Party,  but  failed  to  end  it  before  Andrew  Jackson  who  won  the Battle of New Orleans. For ten points, name this treaty that ended the War of 1812, named for a Belgian city.	ANSWER: Treaty ofGhent
This hero and his friend Pirithous were once stuck to a bench in the underworld after attempting to kidnap Hades’ wife Persephone. This hero’s son Hippolytus rejected the advances of his stepmother, Phaedra. This hero’s father, Aegeus, threw himself off a cliff in despair after this hero returned without changing his black sails to white. For ten points, name this hero, the legendary founder of Athens who defeated the Minotaur in the labyrinth.	ANSWER: Theseus Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 6
British philosopher G.E. Moore wrote a famous "defenseof" this phrase that inspired his later "Proof of an External World. "This phrase titles a pamphlet that argues it is absurd for an is land to rule a continent and which advocates for replacing the Magna Carta with a Continental Charter. For ten points, give this two word phrase that titles a Thomas Paine pamphlet advocating for American independence, a term which indicates obviously correct beliefs.	ANSWER:Common Sense(accept "A Defence ofCommonSense")
A commission made up of, in part, Founding Father Gouverneur Morris drew the plans for this city between the modern streets of Houston and 115th. The Stonewall Inn Riots of the late 1960s occurred in this island's Greenwich Village. The Director of the New Netherlands Peter Minuit supposedly bought this U.S. island for twenty-two dollars worth of beads and other trading goods. For ten points, name this island, the most densely populated New York City borough.	ANSWER:Manhattan(orManhattanIsland; prompt on"New York", "New York City", or "New York County"; prompt on "The City")
This period began after Visigothic nobleman Pelayo [peh-LY-oh] rebelled against Governor Munuza, establishing the Kingdom of Asturias. Large paria tributes were paid during this period, which began with the Battle of Covadonga. This period included a victory over the Almohads at Las Navas de Tolosa, and this period ended with the conquest of Granada by the Catholic monarchs of Castile and Aragon. For ten points, name this period in which the Iberian peninsula was "reclaimed" from Muslim kingdoms.	ANSWER:Reconquista
A play in this genre depicts the general Cleon as a slave to Demos, whose affections are vied for by a sausage-seller named Agoracritus [ah-gor-AH-krih-tus]. Menander [meh-NAN-der] worked in the "Athenian New" school of this genre, whereas its "Old" form is seen in plays like The Knights and The Clouds by Aristophanes, who made fun of Socrates. For ten points, name this lighthearted and often satirical ancient Greek genre of plays, contrasted with Tragedy.	ANSWER:Comedy(accept Ancient GreekComedy; or AthenianComedy; accept Old, Middle, or NewComedy)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 7
A month before his death, this man prepared a 42-page manuscript criticizing the Compromise of 1850, to be read by his ally, Senator James Murray Mason. This man and his wife Floride [FLORIDA] perpetrated the Peggy Eaton affair during the Jackson administration. With Henry Clay and Daniel Webster, this politician formed the "Great Triumvirate" of influential elder statesmen. For ten points, name this South Carolina senator and seventh vice president of the United States.	ANSWER: John C(aldwell)Calhoun
In 1992, this modern nation invaded its eastern neighbor in an attempt to protect the independence of the region of Nagorno-Karabakh. Talaat Pasha ordered forced marches through the Syrian Desert by this nation's namesake ethnic group, killing over one million of them. Multiple wars with Azerbaijan have been fought by, for ten points, what Caucasian nation that faced a 20th-century "Genocide" under the Ottoman Empire?	ANSWER: Republic ofArmenia(orHayastani Hanrapetut’yun;acceptArmenian Soviet Socialist Republic; orHaykakanSovetakan Soc'ialistakanHanrapetut'yun; accept Armenian Genocide)
Along with acting as watchmen, freedmen known as vigiles [VIH-jih-less] worked in this profession, often using a substance called acetum [AH-keh-tum]. Men in this profession in Ancient Greece used ox intestines as a flexible hose. The first brigade of these people in Rome notoriously refused to do their job until distressed citizens negotiated with Crassus over the sale of their homes for minimal prices. For ten points, name this profession held by people who put out blazes.	ANSWER:Firefighters (acceptFiremen; orFirewomen)
This man was given the name "Big Turtle" after becoming the adopted son of Chief Blackfish following his capture by the Shawnee. This former Quaker led an expedition to scout the area which became the Wilderness Road. This head of the Transylvania Company founded a namesake "Borough," one of the first colonial settlements west of the Appalachians. The Cumberland Gap was blazed by, for ten points, what pioneer who settled modern Kentucky?	ANSWER: DanielBoone
This actress gave a four-day tour during the Korean War called "Anything Goes." The nation of Egypt unilaterally banned this actress's films due to her conversion to Judaism following her marriage to Arthur Miller. At Madison Square Garden, this actress performed "Happy Birthday, Mr. President" for then head of state John F. Kennedy. The film Some Like It Hot features, for ten points, which cultural icon and actress from the mid-20th century?	ANSWER: MarilynMonroe(accept Norma JeaneMortenson;or Norma JeaneBaker)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 7
In this state, the largest diamond found in the U.S., nicknamed "Uncle Sam," was discovered in its Prairie Creek mine. Henry Wharton Conway founded a political dynasty known as "The Family" in this state. Motivated by a false claim of a race insurrection, white mobs in this state committed the Elaine Massacre of its Black population. President Eisenhower sent the National Guard to desegregate a high school in, for ten points, what state's capital of Little Rock?	ANSWER:Arkansas  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 7
This  state’s  Ybor  City  was  a  center  for  cigar  manufacturing,  and  its  Hialeah  is  home  to  many marielitos and balseros who arrived before the wet foot-dry foot policy was implemented. Elian Gonzalez was  deported  from  this  state  as  a  child,  an  event  which  is  thought  to  have  led  many  in  its  large Cuban-American  community  to  turn  against  Al  Gore  in  the  close  presidential  election  in  this  state  in 2000. For ten points, name this US state, some 90 miles north of Cuba.	ANSWER: Florida
Francis  Walsingham  used  this  woman’s  correspondence  with  Anthony  Babington  to  convict  her  of treason. Shortly before her execution, this woman embroidered the motto “In my End is my Beginning” on her cloth of estate. After this woman’s third marriage, Protestant nobles forced her surrender at the Battle of Carberry. The Casket Letters were produced by the Earl of Moray as an attempt to prove this woman’s involvement in Lord Darnley’s murder. For ten points, name this queen of Scotland, the mother of James I of England.	ANSWER: Mary,QueenofScots(acceptMaryStuartorMaryIofScotland
This figure’s previous lives and actions are outlined in the Jataka tales. This figure’s mother had a dream of a white elephant piercing her side before this figure’s birth. This religious figure’s birthplace is located in modern day Lumbini, Nepal. This figure achieved enlightenment while sitting under the Bodhi Tree. For ten points, name this religious figure from Ancient India, who founded a namesake meditative religion and was originally named Siddartha Gautama.	ANSWER: The Buddha(acceptSiddarthaorGautamabefore it is mentioned)
This colony gained independence after talks with Patrice Lumumba and Moise Tshombe led to Joseph Kasavubu becoming its first president. A hundred years earlier, this colony was explored and subsequently claimed by Henry Morgan Stanley. The Casement Report detailed atrocities carried out in this colony by theForce Publique, which utilized forced labor in harvesting rubber. For ten points, name this colony once privately controlled by King Leopold II of Belgium.	ANSWER: Belgian Congo(acceptCongoFree State or Democratic Republic of theCongo, prompt on DRC)
In one battle, this city was defended by a floating chain placed on logs to impede ship movement. An emperor legendarily turned into marble after the fall of this city, which was assaulted by the massive Dardanelles gun built by Orban. This city was protected by the walls of the Golden Horn and defenders utilizing Greek Fire. This city lost control of the Bosphorus prior to its fall to Mehmed II in 1453. For ten points, what capital of the Byzantines fell to the Ottoman Empire?	ANSWER: Constantinople(acceptIstanbulorByzantium) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 7
After 1885, this natural formation was named for a New York lawyer and prospector, but its original Lakota Sioux name means “Six Grandfathers.” Historian Doane Robinson’s original plan for this formation included  Red  Cloud,  Meriwether  Lewis,  William  Clark,  and  “Buffalo  Bill”  Cody.  Its  sculptor,  Gutzon Borglum, thought this formation needed to appeal to a broader audience and chose four other subjects. For ten points, what is this National Memorial in the Black Hills of South Dakota, featuring the faces of four U.S. presidents?	ANSWER: Mount Rushmore
The Viscount Rothermere founded a business of this type that advertised as being “for office boys.” One  of  these  companies  claimed  that  a  missile  it  photographed  was  poised  to  hit  “Galtieri’s  gauchos.” During the Winter of Discontent that business of this type popularized the phrase “Crisis? What Crisis?” and  is  one  of  several  of  them  owned  by  Rupert  Murdoch.  For  ten  points,  name  these  businesses  that includeThe Sunand theLondon Times.	ANSWER: Newspapers
Support  for  this  event  gained  traction  when  Albert  Wedemeyer  was  able  to  apply  his  experiences traveling from India to China via the Himalayas. Logistics for this event were supplied by Brian Robertson to General Lucius Clay. Gail Halvorsen became known as the “candy bomber” during this event, the U.S. portion of which was codenamed Operation Vittles. 4,500 tons of cargo were delivered daily at this event’s height. For ten points, name this 1948 event in which the Western Allies circumvented a Soviet blockade in Germany.	ANSWER: BerlinAirlift
In Isabel Allende’s novelDaughter of Fortune, one of these events causes Joaquin to leave a pregnant Eliza.  A  Skookum  king  offers  over$1000  gained  from  one  of  these  events  to  buy  a  character  that  is mistreated  by  Hal,  Charles,  and  Mercedes  before  befriending  John  Thornton.  That  character,  Buck, appears in the Jack London novelThe Call of the Wild, which is set against the backdrop of one of these events in the Yukon. For ten points, name these events, a famous example of which saw miners flock to California in 1849.	ANSWER:Goldrush
Kate Smith debuted a modified version of this song during the 1938 Armistice Day broadcast of her radio show. To avoid political undertones, this song’s lyrics “to the right” were changed to “through the night.”  Woody  Guthrie  wrote  “This  Land  Is  Your  Land”  in  direct  response  to  this  song  that  describes a light shining “from the mountains, to the prairies.” This song urges the listener to “stand beside” and “guide”  the  central  land.  Ending  by  calling  the  title  country  “My  home  sweet  home,”  For  ten  points, name this patriotic song by Irving Berlin.	ANSWER:“GodBlessAmerica” Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 7
By defeating Eugenius at one of these locations in 394, Theodosius I quashed polytheism in favor of Christianity and briefly reunified the Roman Empire. Before a battle at another one of these geographical locations, the winning commander saw the phrase “in hoc signo vinces” in a dream, after which he painted the Chi-Rho[kye-roh] on his soldiers” shields. Constantine I defeated Maxentius in a 312 AD battle at, for ten points, what type of geographical location, an Italian one of which is crossed by the Milvian Bridge?	ANSWER: rivers (acceptbridgebefore read)
The  phrase  “Sherman  pledge”  is  derived  from  William  Sherman’s  refusal  to  run  in  this  election year. A candidate in this election year was tarnished by Samuel Burchard’s comment that his party was becoming that of “rum, Romanism, and rebellion.” The victor in this election year was taunted with the phrase “Ma, Ma, where’s my Pa?” This election year was the first won by a Democrat since the Civil War. James  G.  Blaine  lost  in,  for  ten  points,  what  election  year  in  which  Grover  Cleveland  was  first  elected President?	ANSWER: US presidential election of 1884
This novel was composed during the volcanic winter after the eruption of Mount Tambora, which may have inspired the setting of a frame story in which Robert Walton meets the protagonist while exploring the North Pole. In this novel, Elizabeth Lavenza is killed on her wedding night after her husband refuses to create a female companion for his first creation. For ten points, name this novel about Victor, a mad scientist who creates life, written by Mary Shelley.	ANSWER: Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus
During  the  trial  for  this  event,  Max  Steur  made  Kate  Alterman  constantly  repeat  her  story,  and then accused her of memorizing the facts when she did so. Max Blanck and Isaac Harris were arrested for manslaughter due to this event. During this event, doors to the stairways in the Asch Building were locked to prevent unauthorized breaks. For ten points, name this 1911 disaster in which dozens of garment workers died in a Manhattan fire.	ANSWER: TriangleShirtwaist Factory fire
This field’s “new” form combines it with ethnography and was developed by Lewis Binford. In a book that defined this field’s “processual” form, Willey and Phillips claimed that it is “anthropology or it is nothing.” The Harris Matrix outlines four “laws” of this field, including the law of stratigraphic succession and the law of superposition. Practitioners of this field study sites like Skara Brae and Tel Megiddo. For ten points, name this field of study that examines artifacts and past human societies.	ANSWER: archaeology Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
This policy was enacted under the leadership of D.F. Mala and his National Party. In accordance with this policy, the movement of citizens were restricted by the Pass Laws. People protesting this policy were massacred at Sharpeville and Soweto. In 1993, F.W. de Klerk shared a Nobel Peace Prize for helping to end this policy. Nelson Mandela opposed, for ten points, what South African system of racial segregation?	ANSWER:apartheid
Using the method ofinterpretatio romana, Tacitus identified this god with Mercury in hisGermania. One ceremony to this god involved hanging horses. This god, who was hung from the World Tree, sacrificed his eye for wisdom. This husband of Frigga rides the eight-legged horse Sleipnir and is the father of Balder and Thor. This god’s German form is the namesake of Wednesday. For ten points, name this chief god of the Norse pantheon.	ANSWER: Odin(acceptWodan; acceptWuotan)
This event was a consolation choice after proposals for it to be held at Egyptian pyramids, a Roman amphitheater in Tunisia at sunrise, or a cruise ship fell through. Michael Lindsay-Hogg filmed this event, which took place at 3 Savile Row and featured Billy Preston. This event, which included multiple takes of “Don’t Let Me Down” and “Get Back,” was interrupted by police responding to noise complaints. The albumLet It Befeatures  songs  recorded  during,  for  ten  points,  what  impromptu  January  1969  event above London, the last time the Fab Four played live?	ANSWER:  the Beatles”rooftopconcert(prompt  on  partial  answers;  prompt  on  descriptions  of  the Beatles” last concert)
The United States organized the “coalition of the willing” against this country after a report by an informant known as “Curveball.” A photograph of a man in this country wearing a hood and standing on a box was used as proof that American soldiers were abusing prisoners in Abu Ghraib. In 2003, the United States invaded this country to secure non-existent weapons of mass destruction. For ten points, name this country that was led by Saddam Hussein from Baghdad.	ANSWER: Iraq(accept theIraqi Republic)
This monarch introduced religious freedom in his kingdom with the Declaration of Indulgence, which was partially meant to protect his own Catholicism. George Jeffreys was appointed by this man to severely punish  the  instigators  of  the  Monmouth  Rebellion  in  the  Bloody  Assizes.  This  successor  of  Charles  II served as the Stuart king before being replaced by the House of Orange. For ten points, name this King of England overthrown in the Glorious Revolution.	ANSWER: JamesIIof England (acceptJamesVIof Scotland; prompt on James) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
Peace  in  this  region  was  the  subject  of  the  Sunningdale  Agreement,  which  failed  after  bombings perpetrated by the Glenanne Gang. The Shankill Butchers were active in this region. A group from this region carried out a terrorist attack at the Brighton Hotel that failed to kill Margaret Thatcher. Senator George  Mitchell  developed  principles  for  peace  in  this  region  that  were  adopted  in  the  Good  Friday Agreement. For ten points, name this island that was home to Catholic and Protestant violence during the Troubles.	ANSWER: Ireland(accept NorthernIrelandbefore “island” is read; prompt on United Kingdom, but do not prompt on England)
In  a  court  case  involving  this  state,  William  Wirt  was  hired  by  a  Native  American  tribe  that  was declared a “domestic dependent nation.” A 1972 case involving this state started a nationwide moratorium on the death penalty; another case four years later, also involving this state, ended it. TheFurmanand Greggcases  involved  this  state,  which  arrested  a  white  missionary  for  attempting  to  aid  the  Cherokee Nation,  leading  to  an  1832  Supreme  Court  case.  For  ten  points,  name  this  US  state  involved  in  the Worcestercase.	ANSWER: Georgia
This gospel is the only one where Jesus tries to keep his identity secret, and its manuscripts either have  a  “longer”  ending  or  a  “lost”  shorter  ending.  Augustine  thought  this  book  was  abridged  from  a longer gospel, but scholars now believe it was a source for the other synoptics. In this book, Jesus says “the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath.” For ten points, name this shortest and earliest gospel, the second book of the New Testament.	ANSWER: the Gospel/Book of Mark
Rogier Verbeek wrote a journal analyzing this event, which was the subject of a BBC documentary subtitledThe Last Days. The sun appeared blue and green after the rise of aerosols following this event, which killed over 36,000 people. Though it occurred over 4,000 kilometers away, inhabitants of Rodrigues Island  were  able  to  hear  this  event,  which  caused  the  global  temperature  to  fall  by  over  2  degrees Fahrenheit. For ten points, name this massive 1883 volcanic eruption on an Indonesian island.	ANSWER: eruption of Krakatoa
Rebecca Walker’s article denouncing this man introduced “third-wave feminism.” ANew York Times advertisement attacking this man featured 1600 female signatures. This man refused to take a polygraph test,  unlike  his  accuser,  who  worked  with  him  at  the  EEOC.  This  man  described  his  situation  as  a “high-tech lynching for uppity Blacks” at his nomination hearing in October 1991. For ten points, name this man who was confirmed to the Supreme Court despite allegations that he sexually harassed Anita Hill.	ANSWER: Clarence Thomas Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
This man declared he would not sacrifice “a frog’s hind legs” for the social experiment that his home country was conducting. The Institute of Experimental Medicine’s Physiology wing was first headed by this man, who studied transmarginal inhibition, an organism’s response to stress. He implanted permanent fistulas  in  test  subjects  to  measure  saliva  levels,  laying  the  groundwork  for  his  research  in  classical conditioning. For ten points, name this Russian psychologist who probably did not ring an actual bell to make his dogs drool.	ANSWER: Ivan Pavlov
This  country  fought  the  Duar  War  with  Britain,  and  this  country  was  united  by  a  religious  figure known as the Shabdrung. This country enforces the traditionalghorobe on its Hindu minority, and this country  transitioned  to  democracy  in  2005  under  its  king,  Jigme  Singye.  This  country  is  supported  by India in several border disputes against China. For ten points, name this Himalayan kingdom led by the Whangchuck Dynasty from Thimphu.	ANSWER: Bhutan
This  city’s  residents  included  Dorothy  Talbye,  who  was  hanged  for  murdering  her  three-year-old daughter despite being insane. This city was originally named for the Naumkeag people at its founding in 1629; a year later, a small fleet led by theArbellalanded at this settlement, bringing Simon and Anne Bradstreet to the Americas. John Winthrop’s Puritans fueled the early growth of this city, where Betty Parris, Abigail Williams, and other young girls caused a panic in 1692. For ten points, name this colonial Massachusetts town where 19 people were executed on suspicion of witchcraft.	ANSWER:Salem
William Graves led an US expedition that occupied this port city on its way to attempt to rescue the Czech Legion. This port city was known as Haishenwai before its transfer in the Treaty of Aigun. The city of Novosibirsk was founded in 1893 along a railway that ended in this city. For ten points, name this port city whose name means “Ruler of the East,” the Eastern terminus of the Trans-Siberian Railway.	ANSWER: Vladivostok
A Duke of this region fought a civil war with the Armagnac branch of a royal family. The League of the Public Weal was established by a duke of this region; another duke of this region assassinated Louis, the duke of Orleans, in 1410. This region was led by Charles the Bold and Philip the Good, and troops from  this  region  captured  Joan  of  Arc.  For  ten  points,  name  this  region  of  eastern  France,  a  powerful grand duchy in the late medieval period.	ANSWER: Burgundy(acceptBourgogne) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
John Shipton chaired a political party founded by this man to contest the 2013 Australian Senate elections.  An  organization  founded  by  this  man  gained  prominence  after  publishing  the  “Collateral Murder” video, along with other materials provided by Chelsea Manning. In 2010, Sweden requested that this  man  be  extradited  on  allegations  of  sexual  assault.  This  man  was  granted  asylum  by  Ecuador  in 2012, and currently resides in its London embassy. For ten points, name this whistleblower who founded WikiLeaks.	ANSWER: Julian (Paul) Assange
In  this  city,  Minnijean  Brown  had  a  purse  filled  with  locks  thrown  at  her  and  Melba  Pattillo  was subject to an acid attack, despite the presence of the 101st Airborne Division. Virgil Blossom was removed as Superintendent shortly before this city underwent “The Lost Year,” caused by Orval Faubus’s pledge to close its public high schools and reopen them as private schools. In 1957, nine African American students successfully integrated Central High School in, for ten points, what Arkansas city?	ANSWER: LittleRock
At the age of four, this figure visited Pope Leo IV, who supposedly “anointed” this man as king. From a later pope, Marinus, this man may have received a fragment of the true cross, according to this man’s bishop Asser. He and a rival split the kingdom of Mercia, the eastern half of which joined the kingdom of East Anglia, and this king later rid Wessex of the Danes. For ten points, name this only English monarch to be stylized “the Great.”	ANSWER: Alfredthe Great (orAlfredI)
Physicists often use the “Left step” alternative to this system; another famous alternative was created by Theodor Benfey in a spiral shape. The most recent change to this system included an addition named for  the  state  of  Tennessee.  This  system  initially  had  blank  spaces  left  for  “eka-germanium”  and  other undiscovered  entries.  Dmitri  Mendeleev  introduced,  for  ten  points,  what  system  that  organizes  the  118 chemical elements?	ANSWER: periodictableof the elements
This man led a campaign to boycott school textbooks produced byHarper’sto blackmail the company into firing one of its employees. The Committee of Seventy investigated the actions of this man. During this man’s trial, he fled home arrest and escaped to Spain, but he was recognized from his depiction in a political cartoon drawn by Thomas Nast. For ten points, identify this corrupt leader of Tammany Hall.	ANSWER: William M. “Boss” Tweed Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
The loser of this event began it wearing a “Sugar Daddy” jacket, having been sponsored by the candy. This event, which took place four months after a similar event lost by Margaret Court, was watched by 50 million people and ended in straight sets. A 2017 film starring Emma Stone and Steve Carell depicts, for ten points, what 1973 match in which Billie Jean King defeated Bobby Riggs, helping spark interest in women’s tennis?	ANSWER: BattleoftheSexes(accept   descriptive   answers   related   to   Billie   JeanKing playing/defeating/etc.BobbyRiggsbefore “Billie” is read)
A leader of this kingdom founded the League of Corinth after crushing the Sacred Band of Thebes at Chaeronea[care-oh-nay-uh]. After a leader of this empire died, its generals feuded in the Wars of the Diadochi[die-ah-doe-kee], which produced the Ptolemaic Kingdom and Seleucid Empire. A leader of this kingdom defeated Darius III at the Battle of Issus before conquering Babylon at the Battle of Gaugamela. For ten points, name this kingdom led by Philip II and Alexander the Great.	ANSWER: Kingdom of Macedonia
A  politician  from  this  state  sought  to  assimilate  Native  Americans  in  his  Dawes  Act.  Another politician  from  this  state  gave  the  Seventh  of  March  speech  supporting  the  Compromise  of  1850  and declared  “Liberty  and  union,  now  and  forever”  in  a  reply  to  Hayne.  After  a  senator  from  this  state denounced  the  Kansas-Nebraska  Act,  South  Carolina’s  Preston  Brooks  beat  him  with  a  cane.  For  ten points, name this state represented by Charles Sumner and Daniel Webster.	ANSWER: Massachusetts
This event’s lesser known victims include the Batwa pygmy people. The French attempted to alleviate this  event  through  a  safe  zone  in  Operation  Turquoise.  The  destruction  of  an  aircraft  carrying  Juvenal Habyarimana was used as a pretext to begin this event, which ended when Paul Kagame’s[kah-gah-may’s] Patriotic Front defeated the Interahamwe and recaptured Kigali. For ten points, name this 1994 atrocity in which the Hutus targeted Tutsis in an East African country.	ANSWER: RwandanGenocide(accept descriptions of thegenocideoftheTutsis/bytheHutus until “Hutu” is read)
Highwayman William Brazelton operated around this city in the mid-19th century. Hugh O’Connor founded this non-Mexican city as a military fort in 1775. McKale Center in this city is home to its state’s flagship  university.  Saguaro  National  Park  is  located  just  west  of  this  city,  where  Jared  Lee  Loughner attempted to assassinate Representative Gabrielle Giffords in 2011. For ten points, name this home of the University of Arizona, the second largest city in Arizona.	ANSWER: Tucson, Arizona Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
A  replica  of  this  structure  in  Alliance,  Nebraska  was  made  from  cars  spray-painted  grey.  Early construction  at  this  site  included  a  round  ditch  and  pits  known  as  Aubrey  holes.  The  material  for  this structure may have been quarried in Marlborough Downs or Wales. The sarsen trilithons that make up the  outer  ring  of  this  structure  were  built  using  mortise  and  tenon  joints,  and  they  align  with  the  sun during the summer and winter solstice. For ten points, name this Neolithic structure on Salisbury Plain in Southern England.	ANSWER: Stonehenge
In this war, Hanover was forced to withdraw after the Convention of Klosterzeven, then re-entered after the Battle of Rossbach. The Diplomatic Revolution led to the setup of this war’s alliances. This war was motivated in part by an Austrian desire to recover Silesia. It began with an invasion of Saxony and ended with the Treaty of Paris between Britain and France. For ten points, name this global war between European  powers  that  ended  in  1763,  often  considered  the  first  “World  War”  for  its  theaters  in  North America and India.	ANSWER: SevenYears’ War
This  man  competed  with  Christopher  Columbus’  unhappy  son  as  the  governor  of  Puerto  Rico.  In 1521,  this  man  was  mortally  wounded  in  a  skirmish  with  the  Caloosahatchee  by  a  poisoned  arrow;  his men sailed him to Havana, where he died. For ten points, name this Spanish explorer, the first European to set foot in the modern United States, whose 16th century travels in Florida did not find the Fountain of Youth.	ANSWER: Juan PoncedeLe ́on
This man is in the center of a mosaic in the Basilica of San Vitale in Ravenna, which was conquered by the man to his right in that mosaic. The first appearance ofYersinia pestisin Europe occurred during a plague named for this man. Belisarius conquered the Vandals for this ruler, whose reign was described in Procopius’sSecret History. The Nika Riots opposed this husband of Theodora. For ten points, name this Byzantine emperor who published a law code in 529 AD.	ANSWER: JustinianI (orJustinianthe Great)
Paul Rothemund of Caltech initiated the practice of using this material for origami. Its function was demonstrated  through  the  use  of  sulfur  and  phosphorous  to  label  bacteriophages  in  a  1952  experiment performed  by  Hershey  and  Chase.  This  molecule’s  structure  was  determined  with  the  aid  of  X-ray diffraction  images  taken  by  Rosalind  Franklin.  For  ten  points,  name  this  molecule  whose  double-helix structure was determined by Watson and Crick and that carries our genetic code.	ANSWER: DeoxyribonucleicacidorDNA Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
This  religion  was  favored  by  Gratian,  who  removed  the  Altar  of  Victory  in  favor  of  this  religion. This religion came into conflict with the cults of Mithras and Sol Invictus. Early branches of this religion included  Arianism  and  Nestorianism.  The  Edict  of  Milan  legalized  the  practice  of  this  religion;  earlier, members of this religion were forced to fight in the Colosseum. For ten points, name this religion that was persecuted in Rome until the reign of Constantine the Great.	ANSWER: Christianity
Into the early 20th century, these people had to undergo privy examinations to be sure they were of sound mind to sell their property. The legal doctrine of coverture removed legal rights, such as the right to enter contracts, from these people, and these people were not allowed to apply for credit cards until 1974. The Cult of Domesticity detailed proper values for, for ten points, what class of people whose votes were claimed by anti-suffragists to merely double or negate those of their husbands?	ANSWER: (married)women(accept equivalents, such aswives,girls, etc.)
Description  acceptable.  In  1980,  Reinhold  Messner  became  the  first  person  to  perform  this  action solo. In 1975, Junko Tabei became the first woman to perform this action, which often involves traversing the  Khumbu  Icefall.  After  performing  this  action  in  1988,  Jean-Marc  Boivin  paraglided  for  his  descent down to Camp 2. In 1953, Tenzing Norgay and Sir Edmund Hillary became the first people to accomplish, for ten points, what feat of conquering the tallest peak in the Himalayas?	ANSWER: climbing MountEverest(or descriptions ofsummitting orreachingthetopofMount Everest)
This man died at Otrar while planning an invasion of Ming China. This man’s corpse was exhumed just before Operation Barbarossa by Soviet anthropologists. He began his rise to power from Transoxiana, and  his  descendant  Ulugh  Beg  built  an  observatory  in  this  man’s  capital  city.  He  constantly  came  into conflict with the Chagatai Khanate, won the Battle of Ankara, and executed Bayezid I. For ten points, name this legendary builder of skull pyramids, a crippled Mongol who conquered a huge empire based in Samarkand.	ANSWER: Timurthe Lame (orTamerlane)
This  President  nearly  went  to  war  with  Great  Britain  after  the  USSSan  Jacintoarrested  John Slidell  and  James  Mason  from  aboard  the  RMSTrent.  This  President’s  administration  threatened  the end  of  food  shipments  to  England  if  they  recognized  the  United  States’  opponent,  for  whom  a  British shipyard  built  a  warship,  theAlabama.  For  ten  points,  name  this  U.S.  president  whose  relations  with textile-dependent England were strained by war with the cotton-producing Confederacy.	ANSWER: Abraham Lincoln Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
This  building’s  gate  includes  the  inscription  “O  Soul,  thou  art  at  rest”  from  the  89th  sura  of  the Quran.  It  lies  on  the  south  bank  of  the  Yamuna  River,  north  of  a  garden  with  a  pool  reflecting  this building’s  image.  Its  design  includes  four  minarets,  four  small  domes,  and  a  large  primary  dome,  and it was built as a tomb for Mumtaz, the emperor’s wife. Shah Jahan built, for ten points, what Muslim mausoleum in Agra, a masterpiece of Indian architecture?	ANSWER: TajMahal
An attempt to implicate Jews for one of this man’s actions involved an apron located just below the Goulston Street graffito; that apron belonged to Catherine Eddows. That event proved that this man’s “Dear Boss” letter wasn’t a hoax. Later, this man mailed a kidney to George Lusk with his “From Hell” Letter. For ten points, name this officially unidentified serial killer of London’s Whitechapel district.	ANSWER: JacktheRipper
After Martin Luther called Henry VIII a pig, dolt, and liar, this author returned fire inResponsio ad Lutherum. A decade later, he was executed for treason after refusing to support Henry VIII’s annulment. Peter Giles and Raphael Hythloday discuss an imaginary island in one of this man’s works. For ten points, name this English Christian Humanist who wroteUtopia.	ANSWER: Thomas More
On  May  19th,  2014,  this  river  flowed  into  the  Sea  of  Cortez  for  the  first  time  in  twenty  years.  A misdug irrigation canal that diverted water from this river led to the creation of the Salton Sea. The Glen Canyon Dam is one of 15 dams on this river, providing irrigation for much of the Southwest and creating reservoirs like Lake Powell. For ten points, name this river that flows through the Grand Canyon.	ANSWER:ColoradoRiver
A photo by Yevgeny Khaldei[khal-DAY] shows a soldier raising a flag atop a building in this city. In this city, the muralMy  God,  Help  Me  to  Survive  This  Deadly  Lovedepicts Leonid Brezhnev and Erich Honecker embracing. Lucius D. Clay led relief during Operation Vittles which was known as this city’s “Airlift”. For ten points, name this capital of Germany.	ANSWER: Berlin
This 1972 presidential candidate of the American Independent Party was paralyzed by Arthur Bremer on the campaign trail; that attack was not in response to this politician’s controversial positions, including his 1963 vow of “segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever”. For ten points, name this governor  whose  “Stand  in  the  Schoolhouse  Door”  failed  to  prevent  the  integration  of  the  University  of Alabama.	ANSWER: George Wallace Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 7
This  man  called  the  author  ofThe  Heart  of  Darknessa  “bloody  racist”  in  his  lectureAn  Image of  Africa. He wrote about Chief Ezeulu refusing to work for T.K. Winterbottom inArrow  of  God, and Ikemefuna is killed by his guardian Okonkwo in a work inspired by this author’s experiences of British colonization in Nigeria. For ten points, name this African author ofThings Fall Apart.	ANSWER: ChinuaAchebe
Nigel DeGray and William Montgomery in Room 40 led efforts to translate this document. An agent for  one  country  named  “Mr.  H”  bribed  a  Western  Union  employee  to  send  this  document  to  another destination.  This  document  was  sent  to  Venustiano  Carranza  by  diplomat  Heinrich  von  Eckardt,  who suggested that Texas might be regained from the United States if the Central Powers were victorious. For ten points, name this controversial German diplomatic message that asked Mexico to join World War I.	ANSWER: Zimmermantelegram(accept synonyms for telegram)
This  sporting  event’s  invention  is  credited  to  philologist  Michel  Breal.  At  one  Olympic  Games, Cuban Andarin Carvajal finished in fourth place in this event despite taking a break to eat rotten apples. Boylston Street serves as the finish for one of these events in Boston where three spectators were killed in 2013. For ten points, name this race inspired by a Greek battle, with a length of about 26 miles.	ANSWER: marathon
This  leader  bribed  journalists  with  the  Reptile  Fund.  His  education  minister,  Adalbert  Falk, administered  the  May  Laws,  and  he  called  a  conference  to  modify  the  Treaty  of  San  Stefano.  He  also called another conference of the same name, which incited the Scramble for Africa. This man sent the Ems dispatch to spark war against France, which resulted in his forming a unified country under the Prussian monarch Wilhelm I. For ten points, name this Chancellor who unified Germany.	ANSWER: Otto von Bismarck
This artist may depict Harman van Swole in A Portrait of a Slav Prince, later bought by Catherine the Great. This artist was hired by the Guild of Surgeons in his home nation to paint the dissection of the deceased criminal Aris Kindt. Another work by this man depicts a shooting company led by Franz Banning Cocq [COKE] in The Night Watch. For ten points, name this prolific Dutch artist whose other work includes many self-portraits and The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp.	ANSWER:Rembrandtvan Rijn(orRembrandtHarmenszoonvan Rijn; accept either underlined portion)
Medal of Honor-winner Bud Day saved this man's life after he dropped a third of his body weight while in the Vietnamese POW camp called "The Plantation." With Russ Feingold, this senator co-authored a campaign reform bill that limits the amount of "soft money" available to candidates. This politician succeeded Barry Goldwater as senator from Arizona in 1987. The 2008 Republican candidate for U.S. president was, for ten points, what politician who died in 2018?	ANSWER: JohnMcCain(or John SidneyMcCainIII)
Callimachus[[kah-lee-MAH-kuss]]diedatthisbattlewhilechasingthelosingsideto theirships.OnesideinthisbattlefailedtogetreinforcementsduetotheCarneia [[kar-NAY-uh]]festival.ThewinningstrategyinthisbattlewascreatedbyMiltiades [[mil-TYE-ah-deez]],whodefeatedtheforcesofDariusI.Amessengersupposedlyranover twentymilestoreportthisbattle'soutcome.Fortenpoints,namethisbattleofthe Greco-Persian Wars that inspired a lengthy footrace.	ANSWER: Battle ofMarathon (or Machē touMarathōn os)
Comparing it to the French conquest of Algeria, this act was promoted by Charles Sumner in a Senate bill. In a political cartoon criticizing this event, a man meant to represent Andrew Johnson lugs around an iceberg in a wheelbarrow. In an effort to avoid British conquest, Tsar Alexander II sent the diplomat Eduard de Stoeckl [SHTEH-kul] to execute this sale. For ten points, name this acquisition of a former Russian colony known to detractors as "Seward's Folly."	ANSWER: U.S.PurchaseofAlaska(accept answers whichreferenceBuyingAlaska)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 8
This nation's partisans, like the BOPA, assisted in the evacuation of the majority of its Jewish population to the neutral Kingdom of Sweden. The United States bought the Virgin Islands from this country, and this European nation gave limited autonomy to its colony of Greenland in 1979. Iceland was once controlled by, for ten points, what Scandinavian nation governed from Copenhagen?	ANSWER: Kingdom ofDenmark(or KongerigetDanmark;accept theDanishRealm; or Danmarks Rige)
An injury kept this academic from representing the UK at the 1948 Olympics as a marathon runner. A 2017 "Law" named for this scientist provided amnesty to UK men charged under anti-homosexuality legislation. The Battle of the Atlantic began tipping in the favor of the Allies in large part due to this man cracking the German naval Enigma code. A machine which can replicate any computer algorithm is named for, for ten points, which British computer scientist?	ANSWER: AlanTuring(or Alan MathisonTuring)
Future Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin [meh-NAH-kem BEH-gin] sent a parcel bomb meant to kill this nation's head of state, instead killing police officer Karl Reichert [RYE-kert]. This state's "Economic Miracle" was orchestrated by Ludwig Erhard [EHR-hard] and Chancellor Konrad Adenauer [AH-den-ow-uh]. For ten points, name this country, sometimes known as the "Bonn Republic," which reunified with an eastern communist neighbor in 1990.	ANSWER:West Germany(orWest Deutschland; acceptFederal Republic of Germany; or Bundesrepublik Deutschland; acceptFRG; orBRD; donot accept or prompt on "Deutschland" or "Germany")
This politician hired education reformer John Dewey, who suggested switching his country's alphabet to a Latin script. In 1924, this politician formally abolished the last recognized caliph, Abdulmejid II. Following this man's failure to get the League of Nations to annul the Treaty of Sèvres [SEH-vruh], this head of the Ankara government launched an invasion of the Greek zone of occupation. The father of modern Turkey was, for ten points, which 20th-century politician?	ANSWER: Mustafa KemalAtatürk(or Mustafa KemalPasha;accept Ali Riza ogluMustafa)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 8
In an effort to capture bridges along this river, Operation Lumberjack was launched by the 1st Army under Courtney Hodges. The Nazi codename for the Ardennes Counteroffensive was "Operation Watch on [this river]." Following the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire, Napoleon Bonaparte created a "Confederation" of German states named for this river. Much of the Franco-German border is formed by, for ten points, what European river connected via canal to the Danube?	ANSWER:RhineRiver
The geology concept known as stratigraphy was applied to this science by Danish antiquarian Christian Jürgensen Thomsen. William Cunnington, a founding father of this science, conducted a series of expeditions to Wiltshire, where he recorded findings in barrows. Notable developments in this science include the discoveries of Hissarlik in Turkey and Mycenae [my-SEE-nee] in Greece by Heinrich Schliemann [SHLEE-mahn]. For ten points, name this science which conducts excavations of ancient sites.	ANSWER:Archaeology(acceptArchaeologists; acceptExcavationbefore mentioned; prompt on "Antiquarianism" before "antiquarian")  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 8
This man defeated an opponent denounced as “the continental liar from the state of Maine.” That opponent’s  supporters  responded  with  the  chant,  “Ma,  Ma,  where’s  my  Pa?”  to  publicize  this  man’s relationship with Maria Helpin. This man sent in Federal troops to end the Pullman Strike but lost his party’s nomination for president to William Jennings Bryan due to his ineffective response to the Panic of 1893. For ten points, name this only U.S. president to serve non-consecutive terms.	ANSWER: Grover Cleveland
One  man  from  this  family  defeated  Ottokar  II  at  the  Battle  on  the  Marchfeld  while  another  man from this family won the Battle of Mulhberg against the Schmalkaldic League. That man from this family suffered  from  its  namesake  “jaw,”  possibly  caused  by  this  royal  family’s  inbreeding.  Frederick  III  from this family coined the family motto, “AEIOU,” an acronym that translates to “All the world is subject to Austria.” For ten points, name this family which included Holy Roman Emperor Charles V.	ANSWER: House of Habsburg(acceptHapsburg, prompt on House of Austria before it is mentioned)
One poem focusing on this conflict describes how “leaves / Flying, plunge and expire” and how the central  figures  “feed  the  grass  row  after  rich  row.”  In  another  poem  about  this  conflict,  Robert  Lowell described a monument near the “Old South Boston Aquarium” dedicated to a hero of this conflict named Robert Gould Shaw who led the siege of Fort Wagner in South Carolina. For ten points, name this war that was the subject of Allen Tate’s “Ode to the Confederate Dead.”	ANSWER: U.S. CivilWar
One participant in this event claimed “I am in hell. I am in hell” after being reminded that he knew the victim’s children. A man named John Adams was found alive years after this event, as was its leader’s son,  Thursday  October.  After  this  event,  one  person  sailed  over  6,000  kilometers  to  Timor.  This  1789 event  was  led  by  Fletcher  Christian,  who  stopped  at  Tahiti  before  settling  at  Pitcairn  Island.  For  ten points, name this revolt against Captain William Bligh by his crew.	ANSWER: Mutiny on the Bounty(accept any answer relating to an insurrection, overthrow, revolt, etc. on the HMSBounty
The  site  of  this  location  was  determined  after  Douglas  Aircraft  abandoned  production  plans  at Orchard Field. 271 people were killed on American Airlines Flight 191 in 1979 shortly after leaving this location,  the  worst  aviation  disaster  on  U.S.  soil  until  9/11.  This  location  is  named  after  a  pilot  who became the first navy serviceman to win the Medal of Honor in World War Two. Midway Airport serves the  same  metropolitan  area  as  this  airport  which  is  near  the  Des  Plaines [dessplanes]  River.  For  ten points, name this airport that serves a major U.S. city in Illinois.	ANSWER: Chicago O’HareInternational Airport (prompt onORD) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 8
This  man  once  claimed  that  American  “efforts  have  brought  new  hope  to  all  mankind.”  Another speech this man delivered introduced a term describing a 21-point program for domestic improvement. In that speech, this man claimed that “every [American] has a right to expect from his government a fair deal,”  and  it  was  delivered  after  an  election  in  which  aChicago  Tribuneheadline  falsely  claimed  that Thomas Dewey had defeated this man. For ten points, name this president who ordered the bombing of Hiroshima.	ANSWER: Harry S. Truman
This country’s former president, Leonid Kuchma, tried to rig a 2004 election that sparked nationwide protests in the Orange Revolution. The shooting down of a Malaysia Airlines flight occurred as part of this country’s War in Donbass. Protests in this country’s Donetsk Oblast and bombings of cities like Kharkiv and Odessa were part of a campaign in the south and east of this country advocating Russia’s annexation of Crimea. For ten points, name this Eastern European country governed from Kiev.	ANSWER: Ukraine
The  Greek  loss  at  this  battle  led  to  Boeotia[bee-OH-shuh]  being  overrun.  700  Thespians  and  400 Thebans fought at this battle as part of the losing force. The son of Eurydemus betrayed the Greeks at this battle, but was forced to flee Greece after the Battle of Salamis. That man, Ephialtes, was the reason Themistocles’s defensive plan failed and the Persians were thus able to advance. For ten points, name this battle at the Hot Gates where Leonidas and his 300 Spartans attempt to hold off the Persian army.	ANSWER: Battle of Thermopylae(Accept Battle of theHotGatesbefore it is mentioned)
Four days after a series of events in this city, a similar event was avoided in Hanover thanks to the findings of a paramedic. After the events in this city, a grey Volkswagen Polo with foreign license plates was recovered which served as evidence that led to a raid on the Molenbeek[moh-lun-bek] area of Brussels. The events in this city occurred despite heightened security following an attack earlier that year in this city at the offices ofCharlie Hebdo. An explosion during the events in this city occurred outside a stadium where Francois Hollande was watching a football game. For ten points, what European capital was shaken by a series of terrorist attacks in November, 2015?	ANSWER: Paris
This event was slightly delayed on its first day, July 19, 1848, due to the locked doors in the Wesleyan Methodist Chapel. Thomas M’Clintock read several passages of William Blackstone’sCommentaries, and Frederick Douglass gave a speech at this event. The Declaration of Sentiments was drafted at this event which had been organized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton. For ten points, name this meeting in New York concerning women’s rights.	ANSWER:SenecaFallsConvention Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 8
This man rejected his status as a leader by saying “if you are looking for a Moses to lead you out of this capitalist wilderness, you will stay right where you are.” In the aftermath of the Panic of 1893, this  man,  with  the  ARU,  organized  the  Pullman  Strike.  This  founding  member  of  the  IWW  was  jailed  for telling young men to resist the draft. For ten points, name this Socialist who ran for President four times, the last of which while he was in prison.	ANSWER: Eugene V. Debs
When told that the Pinochet regime killed 3,000 people, this leader responded by saying it “should have  killed more” in  a Vera article.  This  leader,  who  shared  a  meme  disparaging  the  appearance  of Emmanuelle Macron’s wife survived a 2018 stabbing by Adelio Bispo de Oliveira while campaigning against  Fernando  Haddad.  This  man  became  a  front-runner  in  the  2018  election  after  Lula da  Silva  was arrested. Michel Temer was succeeded by, for ten points, what current President of Brazil?	ANSWER: Jair Bolsonaro
This novel’s protagonist adopts the daughter of his brother-in-law and Yugao [yoo-gah-oh]; his own daughter, the younger Akashi Lady, becomes an empress after being adopted by the protagonist’s wife. Although his father arranges for him to marry the daughter of the Minister of the Left, Lady Aoi [ah-oh-ee], this novel’s title “Shining Prince” pursues Lady Fujitsubo [foo-jee-tsoo-boh] because  of  her resemblance to his mother. For ten points, name this Japanese novel of the Heian period [hay-ahn period] written by Murasaki Shikibu [moo-rah-sah-kee shee-kee-boo].	ANSWER: The Tale of Genji (accept Genji monogatari)
In this city, 152 searchlights were aimed toward the sky to create a “Theater of Light.” A series of 1935 laws named for this city barred Jews from holding citizenship. Leni Riefenstahl’s Triumph of the Will documents rallies held in this city. During an event in this city, several Nazis told Robert Jackson they were “just following orders.” For ten points, name this German city where several postwar trials were held.	ANSWER: Nuremberg
This  party  twice  nominated  Charles  Pinckney  for President,  with  Pinckney  soundly  losing  both times. During the War of 1812, this party lost much of its public support after renouncing the war at the Hartford Convention. One member of this party wrote the First Report on the Public Credit in his role as the first Secretary of the Treasury. For ten points, name this party supported by Alexander Hamilton, the early rival of the Democratic-Republicans.	ANSWER: Federalist Party  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020 Bowl Round 8 Page 2
A rebellious general established a ruling dynasty in this empire after winning the Battle of Anfao. Ibn al-Mukhtar chronicled the early monarchs of this empire in his Tarikh al-fattash. The Dendi Kingdom formed out of the collapse of this empire. At the Battle of Tondibi, this empire launched a stampede of cattle in a failed attempt to defeat Judar Pasha’s Moroccan forces. Askia Muhammad led, for ten points, what rival of Mali, a West African empire led from Gao?	ANSWER: Songhai (accept Songhay)
Production of these works was suspended during World War II until 1944, when the Allies requested a reprint of its 1939 French issue for its highly detailed maps. This publication ignored Los Angeles for a decade  until  2019,  when  it  released  an  updated  California  edition;  that  work  cited  seven  locations, including The French Laundry by Thomas Keller, as “worth a special detour,” its highest rating. For ten points, name this red-covered guide that awards up to three stars to exceptional restaurants and was originally intended to increase sales for its namesake tire company.	ANSWER: Michelin Guide(s)
In the Observatory Affair, this man was accused of staging an assassination attempt against himself in a publicity stunt. This man removed his country’s death penalty through the Badinter Act. Operation Satanique,  the  1985  bombing  of  the  Greenpeace  vessel Rainbow Warrior,  was  authorized  by  this  man. This  leader  shared  power  in  a  cohabitation  agreement  with  his  successor,  Jacques  Chirac.  For  ten  points, name this Socialist President of France.	ANSWER: Francois Mitterand
This legislation was opposed by the “Stop Taking Our Privileges” campaign organized by Phyllis Schlafly. A version of this legislation was brought to Congress in 1923 by Alice Paul and Crystal Eastman. In 1975, this amendment stalled after only 35 of the required 38 states ratified it. For ten points, name this failed 1970s amendment meant to give equal legal rights to both sexes in the United States.	ANSWER: Equal Rights Amendment (accept ERA)
The Gotjawal Forest is located in this country on an island where government forces killed tens of thousands of people in the late 1940s to suppress a communist uprising. This country’s Chemulpo Bay was the site of the opening shots of the Russo-Japanese War. The Jeju Uprising took place in this country, where American forces landed at Incheon in 1950 to launch an offensive against its northern neighbor. For ten points, name this Asian country on the southern side of a demilitarized zone, whose capital is Seoul.	ANSWER: South Korea (accept Republic of Korea; accept Hanguk or Taehan-minguk; prompt on “Korea”; do not accept North Korea or Democratic People’s Republic of Korea)  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020 Bowl Round 8 Page 3
In 2009, this country underwent the “Pots and Pans Revolution,” a series of protests against Geir Haarde. This country planned to nationalize Glitnir, one of three banks that ultimately defaulted in 2008. During that financial crisis, the IMF gave this country a 5 billion dollar bailout to stabilize thekr ́ona. For ten points, name this European country where mass protests took place outside the Althing in Reykjavik [rek-ya-vik].	ANSWER:Iceland
To  plan  this  event,  Richard  Bissell  reformed  a  “Special  Group”  of  advisers  known  as  the  5412 Committee.  This  event  enraged  one  leader  to  the  point  of  wanting  to  “splinter  [its  organizer]  into  a thousand pieces and scatter it into the winds;” seven months later, Allen Dulles was ultimately forced to resign. This event was carried out by the Brigade 2506 and prompted one side to formally ally with the Soviet Union. For ten points, name this 1961 event in which the CIA attempted to overthrow Fidel Castro by landing armed troops at a namesake bay.	ANSWER: BayofPigsinvasion (acceptPlayaGironinvasion)
After this man’s travels were abruptly ended by World War I, he returned to composing and produced The Wooden Prince. This man included the movement “the Fatherland is in danger” and multiple refrains of “God save Franz the Kaiser” in a work about an Austrian invasion,Kossuth. He was asked by Miklos Horthy  to  remove  the  name  of  Bela  Balazs  from  his  most  famous  work,  which  is  about  the  namesake duke’s fourth wife, Judith. For ten points, name this Hungarian composer ofDuke Bluebeard’s Castle.	ANSWER: Bela Bartok
This man began his writing career after facing exile following the fall of Amphipolis. In one work by this man, a winning army’s diplomats state that “the strong do what they can and the weak suffer what they  must.”  This  man’s  most  famous  work  includes  the  Melian  Dialogue  and  recounts  how  the  Delian League was led into war against Sparta. Pericles’ Funeral Oration was recorded by, for ten points, what ancient Greek historian and author of aHistory of the Peloponnesian War?	ANSWER: Thucydides
In  1817,  Thomas  Gallaudet  founded  a  school  which  standardized  these  languages  in  the  USA  in Hartford, Connecticut. A language of this type spontaneously arose in a school in Nicaragua in the early 1980s,  and  a  language  of  this  type  arose  in  Martha’s  Vineyard  due  to  a  hereditary  disorder  prevalent on  the  island.  For  ten  points,  name  this  type  of  language  which  uses  manual  and  other  visible  body movements rather than through speech, primarily used by deaf people.	ANSWER: SignLanguages Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
This  man  gave  the  unpopular  George  Herriman  a  lifetime  contract  in  exchange  for  producing  the comic strip Krazy Kat, and he poached another cartoonist, Richard Outcault, from a rival to secure the rights to “The Yellow Kid” comic. This man allegedly told Frederic Remington to “furnish the photos” so he could furnish the Spanish-American War. For ten points, name this publisher of theNew York Journal, a rival of Joseph Pulitzer during the Spanish-American War.	ANSWER: William Randolph Hearst
During World War II, this state’s leader allegedly kept a jar of eyeballs on his desk. This state was home to the infamous Jasenovac[YAH-sen-oh-vatz] concentration camp, where an estimated 20,000 Jews were killed. This state, whose flag featured a grenade against a white and red checker background, was led  by  a  dictator  with  the  title  of  Poglavnik,  a  translation  of  Fuhrer  into  this  state’s  Slavic  language; that leader, Ante Pavelic, was the leader of the Ustashe party, which murdered an estimated half million Orthodox Christian Serbs. For ten points, name this Yugoslav republic with capital Zagreb.	ANSWER: Croatia
A battle at this location resulted in the deaths of William Miller and Harold Stites and included a mortar attack ordered by James Johnston. Three residents of this location stole 50 raincoats to make an impromptu raft with the goal of reaching nearby Angel Island. Robert Stroud was labeled the “Birdman” of this location, where Al Capone was stabbed while incarcerated. For ten points, name this “inescapable” prison located in San Francisco Bay.	ANSWER: AlcatrazFederal Penitentiary
This woman’s daughter, Susanna Cole, was the sole survivor of a raid on her family’s Pelham Bay settlement. Supporters of this woman created the Portsmouth Compact as part of creating a colony run by “judge” William Coddington. In the aftermath of one event, Roger Williams advised this woman to purchase land from the Narragansett natives. John Winthrop exiled this woman as part of the Antinomian Controversy. For ten points, name this woman who was expelled from the Massachusetts Bay Colony and helped found Rhode Island.	ANSWER: Anne Hutchinson(accept AnneMarbury)
This ruler established a detention camp for political opponents on Quiriquina Island. This leader’s rise to power was assisted by propaganda run by the newspapersLa TerceraandEl Murcurio. A deputy of this leader, Manuel Contreras, was sentenced to extensive prison time for using the DINA secret police to assassinate dissident Orlando Letellier. This man orchestrated a coup that deposed Salvador Allende in 1973. For ten points, name this right-wing dictator of Chile.	ANSWER: Augusto Pinochet Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
After they were slow in pledging their allegiance to this king, the MacDonald Clan were massacred in Glencoe. Upon taking the throne, this king was read the Declaration of Right by Parliament; that later became part of the English Bill of Rights. This King’s forces defeated James II’s Jacobite uprising at the Battle of the Boyne, after which this Dutch stadtholder assumed power in the Glorious Revolution. For ten points, name this husband of Mary II, a Prince of Orange and 17th century king of England.	ANSWER: WilliamIIIof England (orWilliamofOrange, prompt on William)
A precursor to this law known as the 15 Passenger Bill was resolved by Richard Angell after it was struck  down  by  Rutherford  Hayes.  The  Magnuson  Act  repealed  this  law,  which  negated  immigration provisions  in  the  Burlingame  Treaty.  “Yellow  Peril”  motivated  this  legislation,  which  was  passed  after increasing immigration of an ethnic group following the 1849 California Gold Rush. For ten points, name this 1882 law that banned citizens from an Asian country from entering the US.	ANSWER: ChineseExclusionAct of 1882
Three related men each named Francisco de Montejo conquered this region in the 16th century. A site in this region includes El Castillo, a step-pyramid dedicated to Kukulcan, and a Great Ball Court. One state in this region has capital at Mer ́ıda, and cities like Uxmal [oosh-mall] and Chichen Itza are also found in this region. The homeland of the Mayan Civilization was, for ten points, what Mexican peninsula where a meteor impact may have killed the dinosaurs and created the Chicxulub Crater near the Gulf of Mexico?	ANSWER:YucatanPeninsula (prompt on Mexico before mentioned)
In 1925, this leader put down Sheikh Said’s Islamist Kurdish revolt. This leader hired John Dewey to  increase  literacy  rates  by  latinizing  his  country’s  alphabet.  This  man  led  a  national  movement  that rejected the Treaty of Sevres’ harsh borders and negotiated the Treaty of Lausanne. The “Six Arrows” ideology of secular, democratic reform was developed to replace Ottoman norms by, for ten points, what modernizing first President of Turkey?	ANSWER: Mustafa KemalAtaturk(accept either underlined name)
A  socialist  politician  from  this  country,  Emile  Vandervelde,  argued  against  its  ruler’s  personal ownership  of  a  colony  investigated  by  Roger  Casement.  This  country  created  the  Force  Publique,  an armed force that cut the hands off of enslaved rubber workers in a colony that the Berlin Conference had given to this country’s King Leopold II. For ten points, name this country that once owned the Congo Free State.	ANSWER: Belgium Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
A blindfolded man is tied to a post in a print by this artist titled “Nothing To Be Done,” part of a  series  calledThe Disasters of Warthat  shows  violent  scenes  from  the  Peninsular  War.  This  artist’s painting of Mameluke horsemen in the Puerta del Sol is set one day before another of his works that shows a  firing  squad  aiming  at  a  man  in  a  white  shirt  outside  of  Madrid.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Spanish painter ofThe Third of May, 1808.	ANSWER: Francisco Goyay Lucientes
The  shipBalticwas  assigned  to  bring  troops  to  this  location  under  the  command  of  Gustavus Fox. The first shots fired from this location were overseen by Abner Doubleday, while Robert Anderson commanded its defense. TheStar of the West, a civilian ship, tried to resupply this location three months before it was targeted by cannon fire ordered by P.G.T. Beauregard. For ten points, name this Charleston fort, the site of the first battle of the Civil War.	ANSWER: FortSumter(prompt on Charleston and/or South Carolina before “Charleston” is read)
Scipio   Aemilianus   facilitates   dialogue   between   historical   Romans   in   this   author’sOn the Commonwealth.   This   author   lays   out   the   foundations   for   a   new   Roman   constitution   isOn the Laws, which survives in fragments. After this man’s execution, Fulvia reportedly stabbed his dead tongue with  a  hairpin  to  punish  him  for  speaking  thePhilippicsagainst  her  husband,  Mark  Antony.  For  ten points, name this Roman orator and philosopher who was executed by the Second Triumvirate.	ANSWER: Marcus Tullius Cicero
This activity was the subject ofLee v. Weisman, a 1992 Supreme Court case decided by Anthony Kennedy’s  late  change  of  opinion.  InEngel v. Vitale,  the  Supreme  Court  ruled  it  unconstitutional  for officials to encourage this activity; in 2000, the Court expanded that ruling to apply to students leading this activity themselves at football games. The Establishment Clause of the First Amendment forbids, for ten points, what type of public religious expression?	ANSWER: (public) schoolprayer(prompt on partial answers, like “prayer” and “religious observances at a school”)
This  specific  activity  was  conceived  by  Benton  MacKaye,  who  opened  its  first  section  from  Bear Mountain in 1923. A challenging section of this activity is known as the Hundred-Mile Wilderness. Randall Lee Smith murdered two women performing this action in 1981, and Mark Sanford used this activity to cover up his extramarital affair in 2009. For ten points, name this activity whose complete version can be conducted from Mount Katahdin in Maine to Springer Mountain in Georgia.	ANSWER: hikingtheAppalachianTrail(accept  equivalents  for  hiking,  such  aswalkingthe AppalachianTrail; prompt on “hiking” and other partial, descriptive answers) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
This  government  adopted  a  motto  from  the  Warring  States  period,  “enrich  the  state,  strengthen the military.” This government abolished the han system, returning land to the central government, and abolished the existing class structure in the Charter Oath. This government’s power was solidified after the Boshin War, in which samurai loyal to the Tokugawa Shogunate were defeated. For ten points, name this modernizing government that ruled Japan after the 1868 restoration of the emperor.	ANSWER: Meijigovernment (acceptMeijiRestoration, the government of EmperorMeiji, etc.)
Annual  performances  of  this  work  were  long  given  to  benefit  the  world’s  first  charity,  London’s Foundling Hospital. This work depicts Roman bagpipers in the instrumental Pifa, or “Pastoral Symphony.” Charles  Jennens  adapted  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  and  the  King  James  Bible  for  this  work’s  text. According to legend, King George II stood up during in the middle of this work’s premiere. For ten points, name  this  oratorio  by  George  Friedrich  Handel  that  is  often  performed  around  Christmas  and  which contains the “Hallelujah” chorus.	ANSWER: Messiah
A  graduate  of  this  school,  David  “Chappie”  James,  became  the  first  African-American  to  reach four-star  general  rank.  In  1932,  an  unethical  experiment  that  failed  to  treat  syphilis  began  at  this school. Methods for replenishing depleted cotton soil and improving peanut yields were developed at this university by George Washington Carver. Booker T. Washington founded, for ten points, what historically black college in Alabama where a group of black airmen were trained during World War II?	ANSWER: TuskegeeUniversity
This event was won five straight times by Taiwan before their defeat in 1980 by Kirkland, Washington. The 2014 runner-up in this event was the first all-black team to win the U.S. title, but was retroactively disqualified;  that  team,  representing  Jackie  Robinson  West  in  Chicago,  was  ruled  to  have  violated  this event’s residency rules. In 2001, the Bronx team finished third in this event with Danny Almonte, who was later found to be 14 years old. For ten points, name this annual international baseball tournament held in South Williamsport, Pennsylvania for 11- to 13-year-olds.	ANSWER: LittleLeagueBaseballWorldSeries(orLLWS; do not accept or prompt on World Series alone)
Arthur Wellesley blamed the outcome of this battle on Alexander Cochrane. The losing side at this battle  crucially  forgot  to  bring  ladders.  Jean  Lafitte[la-feet]  aided  the  winners  of  this  battle,  in  which Edward Pakenham was killed while only eight American soldiers died. This battle was fought shortly after the Treaty of Ghent was signed. For ten points, name this War of 1812 battle won by Andrew Jackson in Louisiana.	ANSWER: Battle of NewOrleans Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
This novel’s protagonist pursues the affections of both Constance Bonacieux and Milady de Winter, who conspires to separate the Duke of Buckingham and Queen Anne with the help of Cardinal Richelieu. In this novel, the heartbroken Comte de la F`ere adopts the nickname Athos and fights alongside Porthos and Aramis before being joined by d’Artagnan[dar-tan-YAN]. For ten points, name this novel by Alexandre Dumas about a small group of soldiers who live by the principle of “one for all and all for one.”	ANSWER: The ThreeMusketeers(or LesTroisMousquetaires)
After this city soundly defeated an opposing fleet at Curzola, the opposing admiral, Andrea Dandolo, committed  suicide.  This  city’s  fleet  was  led  by  Luciano  and  Pietro  Doria  during  the  War  of  Chioggia, which it lost, marking the end of its rivalry with Venice. This Ligurian city’s fleet was led at the Battle of Lepanto by Andrea Doria. For ten points, name this city on the northwest coast of Italy, the birthplace of explorer Christopher Columbus.	ANSWER: Republic ofGenoa
William Seward gave the “Higher Law” speech to oppose this proposal, which was supported by the Georgia Platform. This proposal set the present borders of Texas and rejected a law governing the Utah and New Mexico territories, the Wilmot Proviso. Under this proposal, California was admitted as a free state,  the  slave  trade  was  banned  in  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  a  stronger  Fugitive  Slave  Law  was enacted. For ten points, name this compromise that prolonged the Civil War for ten years.	ANSWER: Compromiseof1850
In  1893,  this  country’s  eastern  border  was  set  at  a  line  drawn  by  Mortimer  Durand  that  passes through the Spin Ghar mountains. The Amu Darya partially forms this country’s border with Tajikistan. A  pair  of  sandstone  Buddhas  in  this  country’s  Bamiyan  Valley  were  dynamited  in  2001  by  its  ruling Taliban,  and  the  Khyber  Pass  is  the  main  border  crossing  between  this  country  and  Pakistan.  For  ten points, name this mountainous central Asian country whose capital is Kabul.	ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
This  ruler  annexed  Bavaria  from  Tassilo  III  and  conquered  Saxony  from  Widukind,  massacring thousands of Saxons at Verden. He divorced his wife Desiderata in 771, then conquered her homeland of Lombardy. This ruler, who established his capital at Aachen, is the subject of an Einhard biography. This son of Pepin the Short restored Leo III to Rome, who crowned him on Christmas Day 800. For ten points, name this King of the Franks and first Holy Roman Emperor.	ANSWER:Charlemagne(orKarlderGrosseorCarolusMagnusorCharlestheGreat) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
King Godfred built the Danevirke as a defense against this ruler, and later this ruler concluded the Treaty of Heiligen with the Hemming. This ruler, who died of pleurisy, was succeeded by his son Louis the Pious, and three of his grandsons divided his empire in the Treaty of Verdun. This ruler, who was advised by Alcuin of York, was crowned on Christmas Day by Leo III as Imperator Romanorum. For ten points, name this King of the Franks who was the first Holy Roman Emperor.	ANSWER: Charlemagne(orCharlesIorCarolusMagnus)
One member of this party gave the 7th of March speech, which cost him his Senate seat. Another member  of  this  party  planned  the  American  System.  William  Henry  Harrison  was  the  first  of  four presidents from this party, and Millard Fillmore was its last. For ten points, name this political party that rivaled the Democrats from the 1830’s to 1850’s before the formation of the Republican party.	ANSWER: WhigParty
This author wrote about a drunk Pope Julius II who tries to convince Julius into letting him into heaven inJulius Exclusus, and he advocated for Christians to act with faith in hisHandbook of a Christian Knight. Hans Holbein created drawings for this man’s best known work, which satirizes the workings of the Catholic Clergy. For ten points, name this Dutch humanist who wroteIn Praise of Folly.	ANSWER: Desiderius Erasmus
The documentaryAn Unreasonable Manexamined this man, whose study of the Chevy Corvair led him to advocate for seat belts and other basic safety features. He ran on a Presidential ticket with Winona LaDuke in a third party candidacy that some feel cost Al Gore the 2000 election. For ten points, name this consumer activist and Green Party politician who wroteUnsafe at Any Speed.	ANSWER: RalphNader
This  event  was  achieved  by  a  man  who  purchased  a  .32  “Safety  Automatic”  Iver  Johnson  at  the Walbridge hardware store and who was inspired by Gaetano Bresci’s murder of Umberto I of Italy. This event,  which  occurred  at  the  Temple  of  Music  at  the  1901  Pan  American  Exposition  in  Buffalo,  was carried out by Leon Czolgosz. For ten points, name this event, the killing of the 25th U.S. President	ANSWER: Assassinationof WilliamMcKinley
This  composer  wrote  the  twelve-toneConnotationsfor  the  opening  of  Lincoln  Center.  He  quoted “Camptown  Races”  in  a  composition  that  features  a  narrator  reciting  the  Gettysburg  Address.  He depicted a couple in western Pennsylvania in a ballet choreographed by Martha Graham that incorporates the Shaker hymn “Simple Gifts.” For ten points, name this American composer ofLincoln Portraitand Appalachian Spring.	ANSWER: Aaron Copland Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 8
Land acquired to create this city was bought from William Blaxton, and it built the first American public school, its Latin School, in 1635. This capital of the Dominion of New England was the site of an incident on King Street involving snowballs and Redcoats that led to the death of Crispus Attacks. For ten points, name this capital of Massachusetts, the site of a 1770 massacre.	ANSWER:Boston
A war against the town of Visby led to a conflict between this country and the Hanseatic League. Christian  I  was  the  first  member  of  this  country’s  Oldenburg  dynasty,  the  oldest  continuously  reigning dynasty in Europe. This nation was briefly ascendant over Sweden and Norway in the Kalmar Union and is currently ruled by Margaret II. For ten points, name this country with capital at Copenhagen.	ANSWER: Denmark
In one wartime film, this character wakes up from a dream where he had to work in a Nazi factory tightening shells. This star ofDer Fuhrer’s Facehas an uncle who is the richest character in their fictional universe .This character wears a sailor’s outfit with a red bow tie but no pants. This character’s nephews are Huey, Dewey, and Louie. For ten points, name this Disney-created duck.	ANSWER: DonaldDuck
One memorial to this policy is located on Eagle Harbor on Bainbridge Island. Those affected by it were asked 28 questions; the last two were the “loyalty questionnaire.” Begun by Executive Order 9066, this  event  was  upheld  by  the  Supreme  Court  inKorematsu v. U.S.For  ten  points,  the  United  States carried out what World War II-era process of deporting Asian-Americans to concentration camps?	ANSWER:Japanese(-American)internment
Amemorialtohonorsoldierskilledwhileservingonthesevesselswasbuiltbythe WarGravesCommission.ThefirsttimetheseweaponswereusedinWorldWarOneresulted inthesinkingoftheHMSPathfinder.OneofthesevesselsunderthecommandofIronCross winnerOttoWeddigen[[VEH-dih-gehn]]sanktheso-called"LiveBaitSquadron"inasingle hour.Fortenpoints,identifythesenavalsubmarinesoperatedbytheGermanEmpireduring the First and Second World Wars.	ANSWER:U-Boats (acceptU-Boots; orUnterseeboots)
WhileinParis,thismanmetwithscientistsMichel-EugeneChevreul[[shev-RUHL]] andOgdonRood,whoinspiredhistheoriesonthe"languageofcolor."Thisdeveloperof chromo-luminarismdepictedtheraucousMoulinRouge[[moo-LAHNROOZH]]inThe Can-Can,andhewasrejectedfromtheParisSalonaftercompletingthemassiveBathersat Asnières[/a][[ahz-NYEHR]].Fortenpoints,namethisFrenchadvocateofpointillism,on display in his [i]A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte[[ZHAHT]].	ANSWER: Georges PierreSeurat
Theyearafterthisdisaster,ThomasEdisonproducedtheshortfilmTheCostof Carelessness.ThisdisasterwasworsenedbythefactthatMaxBlanckandIsaacHarris,who ownedthefactoryatwhichthiseventtookplace,lockedthedoorstopreventunauthorized breaks.TheAmericanSocietyofSafetyProfessionalswasfoundedinthewakeofthis industrialdisaster.Fortenpoints,namethis1911firewhichkilledhundredsofgarment workers in New York City.	ANSWER:Triangle ShirtwaistFactory Fire
ThecaseTinkerv.DesMoinesconcernedwearinganarmbandwithinthese institutionstoprotesttheVietnamWar.HoraceMannpromotedaseriesofreforms concerningtheseinstitutionsthatincludedgradualsecularizationandprofessionalization. TheRacetotheTopandNoChildLeftBehindprogramsaffectedtheseinstitutions.Brownv. BoardofEducationmandateddesegregationwithin,fortenpoints,whatinstitutionsin which children learn?	ANSWER:Schools (accept Public or PrivateSchools;accept CommonSchoolMovement; accept Elementary, Middle, or HighSchools; acceptEducationbefore mentioned)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 9
Thispolitician'sdaughter,Sara,launcheda"CourageandCompassion"campaign meanttoedgeoutherrival,AntonioTrillanes[[tree-YAH-nehs]].Thismanhasbeenlinked totheextrajudicialkillingofcriminalscommittedbythe"Davao[[dah-"VOW"]]Death Squad."ParticipantsinthePeoplePowerRevolutionattemptedtoblockthispresidentfrom allowingtheburialofFerdinandMarcosinanationalcemeteryinManila.Fortenpoints, name this Filipino president who took office in 2016.	ANSWER: RodrigoDuterte[[doo-TEHR-teh]] (or RodrigoRoaDuterte; acceptPRRD; prompt on "Digong" or "Rody")
Josephus[[joh-SEE-fus]]claimedthismonarchledafutilethirteen-yearsiegeofTyre [["TIRE"]],latercomingtotermswithitsking,IthobaalIII[[ith-oh-BALE"thethird"]].This restoreroftheIshtarGatesupposedlyblindedthekingofJudah,Zedekiah,forrebelling againsthisrule.Inthebiblicaltradition,thisChaldean[[kahl-DEE-un]]kingcastShadrach [[SHAD-rak]],Meshach[[MEE-shak]],andAbednego[[ah-BED-neh-go]]intothefiery furnaceandhadhisdreamsinterpretedbyDaniel.Fortenpoints,namethislong-reigning king of the Neo-Babylonian Empire.	ANSWER:Nebuchadnezzar[[neh-buh-kahd-NEH-zar]] II(or Nabû-kudurri-uṣur ; accept Nebuchadnezzarthe Great)
Inthiscity'sCongressofPeace,itwasdeterminedthattheHolySeeshouldhaveits sovereigntyrevoked.TheLeagueofNationsheadquarterswasmovedfromLondontothis neutralcityin1920,remainingsountiltheLeague'sdissolution.FrenchreformerJohn Calvinledasemi-theocraticgovernmentinthiscityduringthe16thcentury.Aconvention that regulates the rules of war is named for, for ten points, what Swiss city?	ANSWER:Geneva(acceptGenève; orGenf; orGinevra)
WhileheadoftheProvisionalTheatre, Bedřich Smetana[[BED-ur-zhik SMEH-tah-nah]]returnedthiscomposer'sfirstdraftofthehistoricalcomedyKingand CharcoalBurnerafterdeclaringitunperformable.HistimeinIowaamongfellowCentral EuropeansledtothiscomposerwritingtheAmericanQuartet.African-Americanspirituals influencedthisman'scomposition,SymphonyfromtheNewWorld.Bohemianfolkmusic often inspired, for ten points, which Czech composer'sSlavonic Dances?	ANSWER: Antonín Dvořák [[deh-VOR-zhak]] (or AntonínLeopold Dvořák )  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 9
ThismancondemnedcommercialdishonestyinBostoninhissermonTheopolis Americana.ThisministerwrotetothejudgeWilliamStoughton[["STOW"-ten]]to congratulatehimonthedestructionof"devilism"duringtheSalemWitchTrials.This religiousfigure'sfather,Increase,servedaspresidentofHarvardinthelate17thcentury.A contemporaryofJonathanEdwards,fortenpoints,whowasthisprominentNewEngland Puritan during the First Great Awakening?	ANSWER:CottonMather(prompt on "Mather")
Thismancreditshisrelativelackofinjuryduringhisplayingcareertotrainingin aikidowithactorBruceLee.Thisbasketballplayerparticipatedinthe"GameoftheCentury" undercoachJohnWooden,beingheldto15points,inpartduetoascratchedcornea.This athlete,whopioneeredthe"Skyhook"technique,boycottedthe1968OlympicGamesshortly afterhisconversiontoIslam.Fortenpoints,namethisMilwaukeeBucksandLosAngeles Lakers legend, a Hall of Fame Center.	ANSWER: KareemAbdul-Jabbar(accept Ferdinand Lewis"Lew"Alcindor, Jr.)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 9
This West Virginia-born Air Force Brigadier General collaborated with Pancho Barnes, who had been a member of the Ninety-Nines. Appointed to the Rogers Commission, this man was given an opportunity for  his  most  celebrated  action  after  Slick  Goodlin  was  rejected  for  demanding  too  much  money.  That action  by  this  man  was  chronicled  inThe  Right  Stuffand  was  achieved  while  flying  theGlamorous Glennis. For ten points, name this pilot who, aboard a Bell X-1 rocket engine-powered aircraft, became the first human to break the sound barrier.	ANSWER: Charles Elwood “Chuck” Yeager
This man’s crew was nearly recalled by Juan Tafur, but the members who chose to stay with this man became known as the “Famous Thirteen.” After an enemy leader threw a Bible to the ground in the face of the priest Valverde, this man captured and ransomed that leader for a room full of gold. This man was victorious at the battle of Cajamarca in modern day Peru. For ten points, name this Spanish conqueror of the Incan Empire.	ANSWER: Francisco Pizarro
A caricaturist as a young man, this artist was mentored by Eug ́ene Boudin who taught him the “en plein air” technique for which this man became known. In response to regular rejections from the Salon de Paris, this man, along with Renoir, C ́ezanne, and others held a heavily criticized exhibition of their own in 1874, and their movement was given a name from one of this man’s paintings,Impressions:  Sunrise. For ten points, name this Impressionist painter of theWater Liliesseries.	ANSWER: Claude Monet
This  city’s  troops  were  defeated  by  Marcus  Salinator,  who  executed  a  general  from  this  city  and threw  that  general’s  head  into  the  tent  of  his  brother  following  the  Battle  of  the  Metaurus.  Cato  the Elder  legendarily  ended  every  speech  advocating  for  the  destruction  of  this  city  that  was  defeated  by Scipio Africanus at the battle of Zama. For ten points, name this city that employed Hannibal Barca and opposed Rome in three Punic Wars.	ANSWER: Carthage
In one event featuring this sport in Auckland, bombs made of flour were thrown on teams and police beat clowns. A tour of one team in this sport was opposed by the Gleneagles Agreement and the group Halt All Racist Tours, owing to racial discrimination in the country from which the team came. Francois Pienaar led South Africa to win this sport’s 1995 World Cup. The Springboks and All Blacks are teams that play, for ten points, what form of football popular in Commonwealth nations?	ANSWER: RugbyUnion (acceptRugbyleague, prompt on “League”) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 9
This man increased gas taxes to fund highway construction through the Collier Burns Act as Governor of California, a position he held a record three consecutive terms. This man replaced Fred Vinson in his highest position in which this man was succeeded by Warren Burger. For ten points, name this Chief of Justice of the Supreme Court who presided over the casesMiranda  v  ArizonaandBrown  v  the  Board  of Education, as well as heading the commission that investigated the death of President Kennedy.	ANSWER: Earl Warren
This city is home to the headquarters of the SAARC and the site of the Pashupatinah Temple. This city’s name derives from a wooden shrine that stood in Durbar Square until it was destroyed by a 2015 earthquake.  In  2001,  Prince  Dipendra  carried  out  a  massacre  in  Narayanhity  Royal  Palace  in  this  city, which led to the death of ten members of the royal family, including King Birendra. For ten points, name this city, the capital of Nepal.	ANSWER: Kathmandu(accept pronunciations with either a “t” or a “th” sound)
In this city in 1891, over 1,000 people died when theGeneral  Slocumcaught fire and sank in one of this  city’s  rivers,  a  river  that  the  Dutch  called  the  “North  River.”  Sheila  Abdus-Salaam  served  on  this city’s Civil Court, the first Muslim woman to serve as a judge in the United States. US Airways Flight 1549 took off from this city, hit several birds, then made a water landing without losing any of the 155 on board. For ten points, name this city whose LaGuardia Airport was the starting site of the “Miracle on the Hudson.”	ANSWER: NewYorkCity (acceptNYC)
This man criticized the minting of private coin in Ireland in his pamphlet “Drapier’s Letters.” This author criticized the Whig Government for not ending their involvement in the War of Spanish Succession inThe  Conduct  of  the  Allies. This author ofA  Tale  of  the  Tubsatirically suggested to the Irish people that they should sell their infants to the English to ease economic troubles inA Modest Proposal. For ten points, name this author ofGulliver’s Travels.	ANSWER: Jonathan Swift
This  man’s  opposition  to  a  proposed  war  with  Austria  prompted  him  to  start  publishing  his newspaper,The Defender of the Constitution, and this man replaced the Cult of Reason with his Cult of the Supreme Being. This man gained power in his most notable position after the death of his former ally, Georges Danton, and this man was executed by guillotine in the Thermadorian Reaction. For ten points, name this Director of the Committee of Public Safety who led the Reign of Terror.	ANSWER: Maximilien Francois Marie Isidore de Robespierre Page 2  DRAFT NHBB C-Set Bowl 2020-2021Bowl Round 9
This man claimed that there is “simply no excuse for the mayhem that followed” the verdict in the Rodney  King  trial  in  his  speechReflections  on  Urban  America.  During  one  debate,  this  man  criticized the bookEarth  in  the  Balancewhich had recently been released by his opponent. After claiming that a former President was a friend of his, Lloyd Bentsen told this man “Senator, you’re not Jack Kennedy.” For ten points, name this Vice President under George H.W. Bush.	ANSWER: Dan Quayle
One artist from this country used floating geometric forms in his non-objective art and founded the Suprematist  movement.  Another  artist  used  photomontage  to  show  an  oversized  leader  of  this  country speaking  in  front  of  industrial  wires  and  phonograph-like  speakers.  Emigrants  from  this  country  to Munich,  Germany  founded  the  Blue  Rider  movement.  A  propagandistic  “illustration”  was  created  by Varvara  Stepanova  to  represent  a  Five-Year  Plan  instituted  in,  for  ten  points,  what  home  country  of artists Kasimir Malevich and Wassily Kandinsky?	ANSWER: Russia(acceptSovietUnion;  acceptUSSRorUnionofSovietSocialistRepublics; acceptCCCPorSoyuzSovetskikhSotsialisticheskikhRespublik)
Precedents for this Supreme Court case includedKirby v. KirbyandKinney v. The Commonwealth. Robert McIlwaine represented the state party in this case using precedents likeNaim  v.  NaimandPace v.  Alabama. The 9-0 ruling in this case held that anti-miscegenation laws violated the Equal Protection and Due Process Clauses. For ten points, name this landmark 1967 case that ended bans on interracial marriage.	ANSWER: Lovingv. Virginia
Walter Kauffman’s biography of this man argued that syphilis caused his end of life madness, which seemingly  began  with  an  1889  incident  in  which  he  rushed  to  save  a  horse  from  being  beaten  on  the streets of Turin. This thinker, who stated that the “abyss will gaze back into you” inBeyond  Good  and Evil, discussed the role of the Apollonian and the Dionysian in hisThe  Birth  of  Tragedy. Nazi German philosophy was heavily influenced by, for ten points, what German author ofThus Spake Zarathustra?	ANSWER: Frederich Nietzsche
Prior to this battle, Joachim Murat[yoh-ah-keemmu-rah] was admonished for declaring an armistice at Sch ̈ongrabern[SCHUN-grah-bern] without his superior’s consent, giving the enemy time to join forces near Brno [BIR-no]. One general, who sought to begin this battle before the entrance of Prussia into the war, baited Franz von Weyrother’s[VIE-roh-ter’s] forces by abandoning the Pratzen Heights. The Treaty of Pressburg was signed after this battle, dissolving the Holy Roman Empire. For ten points, name this 1805 victory over the Third Coalition by Napoleon.	ANSWER: Battle of Austerlitz(accept Battle of theThreeEmperors) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
In  this  state’s  town  of  Gibsonton,  a  circus  colony  became  a  retirement  community  for  performers, including Grady Stiles, the murdered “Lobster Boy.” The Gasparilla Pirate Festival is held in this state, which experienced an influx of immigration from the south through the Freedom Flights and the Mariel Boatlift.  This  state’s  Tamiami  Trail  along  much  of  Route  41  becomes  Calle  Ocho  in  the  Little  Havana neighborhood.  For ten  points, name  this  state  where FDR  was  nearly assassinated in  Bayfront  Park  in Miami.	ANSWER: Florida
This  man  seized  emergency  powers  after  announcing  the  discovery  of  the  Cohen  Plan,  a  supposed communist plot against him. This ruler repressed his former supporters, the fascist Integralist movement, after  banning  all  political  parties.  This  man  declared  that  he  would  “leave  life  to  enter  history”  before shooting himself with a Colt pistol in 1954 to prevent a military coup. The Petrobras state monopoly on oil was created by, for ten points, what Estado Novo-era president of Brazil?	ANSWER: Getulio Vargas
This  piece  includes  a  “shuffle”  theme  whose  melody  parallels  that  of  its  composer’s  song  “The Man  I  Love.”  This  piece,  which  was  orchestrated  by  Ferde  Grof ́e [ferdgro-FAY],  called  for  “vernacular instruments” such as a banjo. The “Train” theme in this piece was inspired by the “steely rhythms” of its composer’s train ride to Boston. This piece, commissioned for “An Experiment in Modern Music” by Paul Whiteman in 1924, begins with a 17-note clarinet glissando. For ten points, name this “jazz concerto” by George Gershwin.	ANSWER: RhapsodyinBlue
In the prelude to this conflict, Jeffery Amherst heavily restricted the use of gunpowder. The Conestoga Massacre  was  carried  out  by  the  Paxton  Boys  in  the  aftermath  of  this  conflict.  Appalled  by  colonial behavior during this conflict, George III passed a law banning settlers from moving past the Appalachian Mountains. The Royal Proclamation of 1763 was passed in response to, for ten points, what rebellion led by a namesake Ottawa Chief?	ANSWER: Pontiac’sRebellion
This empire was ruled by the Asen Dynasty which came to power after Ivan Asen won a 7-year siege at Tarnovo. Basil II fought a series of wars against this empire, earning a nickname for slaying its people. A leader of this empire had the Peslav Literary School create the Cyrillic alphabet. Under the leadership of Simeon the Great, this empire fought the Magyars in several wars with neighboring Hungary. For ten points, name this empire that, in 809 AD, took control of Sofia.	ANSWER: Bulgarian Empire Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
The namesake ship of theMataafastorm was wrecked in this body of water in 1905. Large cobblestone pits built by a pre-Ojibwa people around this body of water are named after a river that flows into it, the Pukaskwa. All 29 crewmembers were killed in a shipwreck on this lake involving a freighter carrying iron ore. Thunder Bay is the largest city that lies along this lake, which also contains Duluth, Minnesota. The SS Edmund Fitzgeraldsank in, for ten points, what largest of the Great Lakes?	ANSWER: Lake Superior
This ruler’s actions sparked Donatist opposition to the “traditors.” This leader solidified his rule by defeating Carinus at the Battle of the Margus. Causanius led a revolt in Britannia during this ruler’s reign, causing Maximian to be elevated to Augustus. This man was the first Roman emperor to abdicate, retiring to his palace at Split. For ten points, name this emperor who organized the Tetrarchy and conducted the last Christian persecutions.	ANSWER: Diocletian(or  Gaius  Aurelius  ValeriusDiocletianusAugustus,  but  do  not  prompt  on partial names thereof; acceptDiocles)
This  man  replaced  John  Carver  as  governor,  and  his  successor  Edward  Winslow  co-wroteMourt’s Relationwith  him.  During  this  man’s  leadership,  the  Nemasket  Raid  was  launched  by  Myles  Standish. Samoset contacted the English during this man’s leadership, thus establishing relations with Massasoit. This Puritan leader documented the landing at Cape Cod and his signing of the Mayflower Compact. For ten points, name this five-time governor of Plymouth Colony and author ofOn Plymouth Plantation.	ANSWER: William Bradford
In 1639, Queen Christina of Sweden invited this thinker to organize an academy of science and to tutor her. One of his major works is presented as the product of six days thinking in solitude. This thinker argued that the soul was in the pineal gland as part of his theory of mind-body dualism, which he explored in part of hisMeditations on First Philosophy. For ten points, name this philosopher whoseDiscourse on Methodincludes the concept “I think, therefore I am.”	ANSWER: Ren ́e Descartes[day-KART]
This battle’s winners opened fire on William Stevenson’s friendly unit when it insisted on retreating to Helpmekaar. Members of John Chard’s engineers were caught in this battle after they were dispatched to  repair  pontoon  bridges  on  the  Buffalo  River.  Eleven  Victoria  Crosses  were  awarded  for  this  battle, the most ever given to a single regiment. This battle’s winners defended a hospital building on the same day that the Battle of Isandlwana was fought. For ten points, name this 1879 battle in which 100 British troops repelled a Zulu impi.	ANSWER: Battle of Rorke’sDrift Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
John Roberts noted that in this ruling, “it’s quite clear that [the Supreme Court isn’t] interpreting the law, they’re making the law.” In one dissent during this case, Oliver Wendell Holmes’s dissent in this case noted  “The  Fourteenth  Amendment  does  not  enact  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer’sSocial Statics.”West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrishended a forty-year era named for this case in which the Supreme Court consistently sided  against  economic  regulation.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1905  Supreme  Court  case  that  cited  due process in overturning a law limiting the work hours of bakers in New York.	ANSWER: Lochnerv. New York
In one game in this series, the American government uses the Bay of Pigs invasion as an alibi for a cosmonaut’s injuries sustained during Project Mercury. The end of the Cuban Missile Crisis thwarts the attempted defection of Nikolai Sokolov in this series. The Outer Heaven mercenary company, owned by Ocelot, grows strong enough to challenge world governments in this series’ fourth installment, “The Guns of  the  Patriots.”  Hideo  Kojima  created,  for  ten  points,  what  iconic  stealth  video  game  franchise  whose protagonist is Solid Snake?	ANSWER: MetalGear
This right was encouraged by a movement founded by Elizabeth Vesey and Elizabeth Montagu, the Blue Stockings Society. A report by Charles Talleyrand claimed women should only have limited access to this right; a response to that report noted that women only appeared irrational because they were denied this right, which is necessary for women to properly raise their children. Mary Wollstonecraft argued for women’s access to, for ten points, what right, the subject of Jean-Jacques Rousseau’sEmile[ay-meel]?	ANSWER:education(accept equivalent answers)
Nazi  playwright  Dietrich  Eckart’s  racist  adaptation  of  this  play  depicts  the  Great  Boyg  and  the Green-Clad  Woman  as  Jews  who  are  shamed  and  outsmarted  by  the  title,  Germanic  character.  In  this play, Helga receives a silver button as a gift to her sister, Solveig, This play’s incidental music, including the songs “Morning Mood” and “The Death of Ase” was written by Edvard Grieg. For ten points, name this play written by Henrik Ibsen about a title Norwegian hero.	ANSWER: PeerGynt
This kingdom was forced to cede sovereignty to Great Britain by the captain George Paulet. A ruler of this kingdom was aided by Gerrit Judd and proclaimed the Great Mahele[ma-hay-lay] to redistribute land.  The  unifier  of  this  kingdom  protected  noncombatants  by  proclaiming  the  Law  of  the  Splintered Paddle.  A  queen  of  this  kingdom  was  forced  to  agree  to  the  Bayonet  Constitution  by  American  forces. For ten points, name this Pacific kingdom ruled by Kamehameha [ka-MAY-ha-MAY-ha] and Lili’uokalani [LILY-oh-ka-LAH-nee].	ANSWER: Kingdom ofHawai’i Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
This  man,  who  shared  leadership  with  Crixus  and  Oenomaus,  routed  Mummius  when  he  attacked against orders. Gaius Claudius Glaber tried to starve this man’s forces while they camped on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius. Many of this man’s supporters were crucified by Crassus along the Appian Way after they  lost  the  Third  Servile  War.  For  ten  points,  name  this  former  gladiator  who  died  in  71  BC  while leading a slave revolt against the Roman Republic.	ANSWER: Spartacus
An artist from this country was influenced by Marcel Duchamp to weld together 42 bicycle frames. That  artist,  who  filmed  the  aftermath  of  a  2008  earthquake  in  this  country,  also  exhibited  one  million handmade porcelain sunflower seeds in England’s Tate Modern gallery. For ten points, name this country where artist and political activist Ai Weiwei consulted on the design of a “bird’s nest” stadium built for this country’s 2008 Summer Olympics.	ANSWER: People’s Republic of China(orZhongguo)
This battle’s winning side was greatly aided when they learned that an attack at “A-F” would take place; that information came by breaking the JN25 code. Dauntless dive bombers were used to great effect in this battle, as one side sunk theAkagi,Kagaand two other ships while only losing theYorktown. For ten points, name this battle fought a month after the Battle of Coral Sea, a carrier battle that became the “turning point” of World War II’s Pacific theater.	ANSWER: Battle of Midway
This event directly led to the passage of the Sullivan-Hoey Law. The owners of the central location of this event, Max Blanck and Isaac Harris, were acquitted of manslaughter charges when the prosecution was  unable  to  prove  that  they  knew  a  series  of  doors  were  locked.  The  ILGWU  union  gained  traction in the wake of this event, in which some immigrant workers jumped nine stories to their death. For ten points, name this 1911 fire in a New York City factory.	ANSWER: TriangleShirtwaistfactory fire
This ruler signed the Treaty of Ryswick to end a lengthy war against a “Grand Alliance” that opposed him. Earlier, this ruler had used the death of Philip IV and a dowry owed to this man’s nation to start the War of the Devolution. This king ended toleration for Huguenots in the Edict of Fontainebleau, which revoked  the  Edict  of  Nantes.  The  death  of  Cardinal  Mazarin  began  the  72-year-long  reign  of,  for  ten points, what absolutist “Sun King” of France?	ANSWER: LouisXIV[14] Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
This  composer  protested  in  support  of  Alfred  Dreyfus  by  refusing  to  perform  in  Paris  in  1899.  He included  an  “Arietta”  and  a  tribute  to  Niels  Gade  in  a  ten-book  set  of  66  short  piano  pieces,  and  a tympani roll opens his onlyPiano Concerto, in A minor. This composer of theLyric Piecesalso wrote incidental music for a Henrik Ibsen play that includes “Anitra’s Dance” and “Morning Mood.” For ten points, name this nationalist Norwegian composer who wrotePeer Gynt.	ANSWER: Edvard Grieg
One  side  in  this  battle  repeatedly  moved  unarmed  merchant  ships  into  port  to  invoke  the  Hague Convention’s  Article  16  and  prevent  the  enemy  from  leaving.  After  damaging  theAjax,Achilles,  and Exeter,  the  losing  side  in  this  battle  made  the  mistake  of  retreating  to  Montevideo.  Hans  Langsdorff decided  to  scuttle  his  ship,Graf Spee,  rather  than  continue  this  battle.  For  ten  points,  name  this  first naval battle of World War II, named for its location in the river that forms the border between Argentina and Uruguay.	ANSWER: Battle of the River Plate(or Battle of the Rio de LaPlata)
This project began thanks to a revolution started by the killing of a Chinese civilian and his donkey. Philippe-Jean  Bunau-Varilla  orchestrated  a  controversial  treaty,  later  undone  by  the  Torrijos-Carter Treaties,  granting  the  US  control  over  this  project.  “Gunboat  diplomacy”  against  Colombia  sparked  a Central American country’s independence and the building of, for ten points, what canal that, in 1914, connected the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans?	ANSWER: PanamaCanal
This  battle,  whose  site  is  commemorated  at  Chalmette  National  Park,  included  an  assault  on  the defenders’  artillery  position  led  by  William  Thornton.  The  attackers  in  this  battle  had  no  ladders  to scale  a  series  of  three  earthworks  and  suffered  the  death  of  their  commander,  Edward  Pakenham.  This American victory was technically fought after the signing of the Treaty of Ghent had ended the War of 1812. For ten points, name this battle in which Andrew Jackson defended a Louisiana port city.	ANSWER: Battle of NewOrleans
This mentor of Phog Allen played center on the McGill University football team in the 1890s. Luther Gulick asked this man for advice on keeping members of the Springfield YMCA in shape; this man used a pair of peach baskets in his ensuing invented game. The University of Kansas’ only losing coach in one sport  is,  ironically,  this  man.  The  NBA  Hall  of  Fame  is  named  after,  for  ten  points,  what  inventor  of basketball?	ANSWER: James Naismith Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
One side in this battle used the Pitomnik airfield to supply bomber raids on the Red October factory and  Barrikady  tractor  works.  Erwin  Konig  was  supposedly  killed  at  this  battle  in  a  duel  against  rival sniper Vasily Zaitsev. This battle turned when Erich von Manstein failed to counter Operation Uranus, leaving  Friedrich  Paulus’  6th  Army  entrapped  by  Georgi  Zhukov’s  Soviet  troops.  For  ten  points,  name this 1942-43 battle of the Eastern Front fought for a Russian city on the Volga River.	ANSWER: Battle of Stalingrad
A  virus  capable  of  causing  this  disease  was  discovered  in  1911  by  Peyton  Rous.  The  fusion  gene BCR-ABL1, found on the Philadelphia chromosome, causes a tyrosine kinase to always be on, leading to a type of this disease. It is protected against by the protein p53, the “guardian of the genome.” Metastasis is the spread of, for ten points, what type of disease, including lymphomas and leukemia, that leads to uncontrolled cell growth and the formation of tumors?	ANSWER: cancer(acceptsarcoma;  acceptleukemiaand  answers  involving  it  after  “BCR-ABL1”  is read)
This justice’s opinion used the Contract Clause to protect the independence of Dartmouth College, and  he  clarified  the  Interstate  Commerce  Clause  in  his  opinion  inGibbons v. Ogden.  Andrew  Jackson taunted  this  man  to  enforce  his  ruling  inWorcester v. Georgia.  For  ten  points,  name  this  fourth  and longest-serving Chief Justice who, in his ruling inMarbury v. Madison, established the Supreme Court’s power of judicial review.	ANSWER: John Marshall
This material was used for the Capitoline Museum’s sculpture of a she-wolf with the infant Romulus and Remus. Sculptures in this artistic medium were often made using the lost-wax method. An artist used this material for a circle of six men about to be executed during the Hundred Years War, known asThe Burghers of Calais, and for a nude sculpture claimed to be cast from a living model. For ten points, name this metal used by Auguste Rodin [roh-dan] to createThe Thinkerand a sculpture of itsAge.	ANSWER:bronze(accept The Age ofBronzeor theBronzeAge)
In 1985, this organization’s headquarters-in-exile was targeted in Operation Wooden Leg, an air strike in Tunisia. This group was forced out of Jordan and into Lebanon after Black September in 1970. This group  was  considered  a  terrorist  organization  by  the  US  until  1991,  and  it  signed  the  Oslo  Accords  in 1993, thus recognizing the State of Israel. Yasser Arafat once led, for ten points, what nationalist group that sought the “liberation” of an Arab state from Israel?	ANSWER: PalestinianLiberationOrganization(orPLO) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
This author described his time serving as a war emissary during a civil war in his 2012 memoirThere was a Country. In a novel by this author, Clara’s societal status prevents Obi from marrying her. This author  ofNo Longer at Easeadvocated  for  the  state  of  Biafra  and  created  a  character  who  commits suicide after the people of Umuofia refuse to fight against British missionaries. Okonkwo was created by, for ten points, what Nigerian author ofThings Fall Apart?	ANSWER: Chinua Achebe(or Albert ChinualumoguAchebe)
In this state, James Earl Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael Schwerner were killed by a lynch mob in Neshoba County. This state’s penitentiary at Parchman Farm held hundreds of Freedom Riders under  arrest  by  order  of  Governor  Ross  Barnett.  In  1955  in  this  state,  J.W.  Milam  and  Roy  Bryant kidnapped and murdered 14-year-old Emmett Till. For ten points, name this state where, in 1963, Byron de la Beckwith murdered civil rights activist Medgar Evers at his home in the state capital, Jackson.	ANSWER:Mississippi
The  Anif  Document  ended  centuries  of  Wittelsbach  rule  in  this  state.  Prussia  and  Austria  fought over this state in a war of succession known as the Potato War. This state, which fought with Napoleonic France  against  its  eastern  neighbor,  Austria,  was  once  ruled  by  Ludwig  the  Mad,  who  built  the  castle of  Neuschwanstein [noysh-van-shtein].  For  ten  points,  name  this  primarily  Catholic  state  in  southern Germany whose capital is Munich.	ANSWER:Bavaria(orBayern)
This leader abolished his country’s Planning Commission and replaced it with the NITI Aayog. This leader launched an economic plan promising “Housing for All” by the year 2022. Over the 2016 Labor Day Weekend, over 100 million workers took part in a strike against this leader’s efforts towards privatization. This leader is criticized for his role in the 2002 anti-Muslim riots in the state of Gujarat. For ten points, name this leader elected in 2014 after defeating the INC, the current Prime Minister of India.	ANSWER: Narendra Modi
This group pulled its support for Jimmy Walker, partly because of his frequent affairs with “chorus girls.” An image captioned “Let Us Prey” depicted this group’s members as vultures. This institution was very  popular  among  Irish  immigrants,  was  mocked  by  the  cartoons  of  reformer  Thomas  Nast,  and  was once led by the corrupt “Boss” Tweed. New York City was long under the control of, for ten points, what Democratic Party political machine?	ANSWER:TammanyHall  (or  Society  of  SaintTammany;  or  Sons  of  SaintTammany;  or  the ColumbianOrder) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
This  event’s  fourth  principle  declared  that  “superior  orders”  do  not  relieve  a  person  from  lawful responsibility.  Seven  subjects  of  these  events  were  taken  to  Spandau.  Their  location  was  chosen symbolically, as it had hosted an annual propaganda rally and was the city where, in 1935, a harsh set of anti-Semitic laws was signed. Luftwaffe commander Hermann Goring was sentenced to death at, for ten points, what series of trials in which Nazi leaders were tried for war crimes?	ANSWER: Nurembergtrials
In  this  modern  day  country,  Boleslaw[boll-eh-slav]  the  Pious  of  this  country’s  Piast  Dynasty granted Jews legal rights with the Statue of Kalisz[kal-eesh]. In this modern day country, the Szaltcha [SHALL-chah] enacted the Golden Liberty under its Jagiellion[yah-gell-ee-on] dynasty. This modern day country  has  been  partitioned  between  Russia,  Prussia,  and  Austria.  For  ten  points,  name  this  eastern European nation with capital Warsaw.	ANSWER: Poland
This man’s autobiography details his successful separation of the conjoined twins Josef and Theresia Binder,  though  his  scientific  credentials  were  criticized  in  2015  after  he  denied  Big  Bang  theory.  This author ofGifted Handsgave the keynote address at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast and, in September 2015,  stated  that  a  Muslim  should  not  be  in  charge  of  the  United  States.  For  ten  points,  name  this Republican presidential candidate and retired neurosurgeon.	ANSWER: Ben Carson
This  person  came  to  power  after  his  wife  ran  over  her  father’s  body  with  a  chariot  on  the  Vicus Sceleratus. This person obtained the Sibylline Books from the Cumaean Sibyl. He allied with Lars Porsenna to try to regain power after Lucius Junius Brutus’s forces drove him out due to public indignation when his  son,  Sextus,  raped  Lucretia.  For  ten  points,  name  this  successor  to  Servius  Tullius,  the  last  king  of Rome.	ANSWER: TarquiniusSuperbusorTarquintheProud
This founder and editor ofThe  Crisismagazine broke with an organization he co-founded over his opinion  of  the  “separate  but  equal”  doctrine.  This  man’s  Niagara  movement  disagreed  with  Booker  T. Washington’s  Atlanta  compromise,  instead  holding  that  the  small,  elite  “Talented  Tenth”  should  seek full  political  authority  in  the  South.  For  ten  points,  name  this  author  ofThe  Souls  of  Black  Folkand co-founder of the NAACP.	ANSWER: William Edward Burghardt (W.E.B.) DuBois Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 9
This  ruler  faced  early  trouble  from  two  Eberhards,  of  Bavaria  and  Franconia,  and  his  half-brother Thankmar during his early reign. Liudolf, this man’s son, fought against him before a notable battle, and John XII crowned this man before being deposed by this ruler. This son of Henry the Fowler was aided by Conrad the Red to defeat the Magyars at the Battle of Lechfeld. For ten points, name this Saxon German king, the first Holy Roman Emperor.	ANSWER: OttoI orOttothe Great
A  revival  of  this  group  that  started  at  one  its  communities  in  Watervliet  was  called  the  Era  of Manifestations. This religious group uses a heart in a palm to symbolize its founder, Ann Lee’s, teachings. Aaron Copland’s Appalachian Spring was influenced by this sect’s hymn Simple Gifts. This group broke with the Quakers on lay celibacy. For ten points, name this religious group, nicknamed for its members’ dancing during prayers.	ANSWER:ShakersorUnitedSocietyofBelieversinChrist’sSecondAppearing
Chicago’s  Marina  Towers  provides  19  stories  of  this  feature,  which  is  often  required  in  residential areas  at  a  ratio  of  1  unit  per  residence.  These  features  may  contribute  to  climate  change  by  replacing green  areas  with  paved  asphalt.  The  Americans  With  Disabilities  Act  requires  a  certain  percentage  of these  places  to  be  reserved  for  handicap-accessible  use.  For  ten  points,  name  this  urban  feature  found outside stores and along curbs, where cars are left when not in use.	ANSWER: parkingspaces orparkinglots (accept descriptions of “outdoor places to park a vehicle;” do not accept garages or underground parking)
This politician explained his views of federalism in his Disquisition on Government, and he described slavery as a “positive good.” He succeed Abel Upshur, who was killed in theUSS Princetonexplosion, as Secretary of State under John Tyler. For ten points, name this South Carolina politician who served as Vice President for John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson who supported nullification.	ANSWER: John C.Calhoun
This character discusses fighting off sea monsters called “nicoras.” Wiglaf is the only person who attends this man in death, and is crowned king as a result. Unferth apologizes for doubting this character by granting him the sword Hrunting. For ten points, name this title character of the oldest surviving work of Old English poetry, an epic hero defeats Grendel.	ANSWER:Beowulf Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 9
Thiscountrypurgeditsmilitaryinthe2000sonthebasisofthe“Ergenekon” [[ar-geh-NEH-kon]]ultra-nationalistconspiracy.In2019,thiscountrylaunchedOperation PeaceSpringaftertheU.S.pulleditssupportfromKurdishallies.Thiscountryhasbeen accusedofdemocraticbackslidingandIslamismundertheAKP,orJusticeandDevelopment Party,hurtingtheirchancesofjoiningtheEU.Fortenpoints,namethiscountryledbyRecep Tayyip Erdoğan [[reh-CHEP ty-EEP EHR-duh-wahn]].	ANSWER: Republic ofTurkey(orTürkiyeCumhuriyeti)
Inanearlyexperimentalversionofthisliteraryform,LawrenceSterneusedapage ofblackinktoillustratesorrow.Thisform's"sentimental"genreisexemplifiedbySamuel Richardson's1740work,Pamela;orVirtueRewarded.Thisformseparatedfromthe traditionalromanceduringtheearlyeighteenthcenturywiththepublicationofMoll FlandersandRobinsonCrusoebyDanielDefoe.Fortenpoints,namethislengthyformof narrative writing, typified by Jonathan Swift'sGulliver'sTravels.	ANSWER:Novel(acceptNovella; accept SentimentalNovel; accept TravelNovel; prompt on "romance" before mentioned; prompt on answers such as "book")
VietnamveteranKennethDeardorffisthelastmantomakeuseofthisact, facilitatinghismovetoAlaskatoopenageneralstorealongtheStonyRiver.HoraceGreeley andGeorgeHenryEvanswereearlyadvocatesofthislaw,withthelatterrunningonthe platformof"VoteYourselfaFarm."TheKinkaidActamendedthislaw,allowinglargeswaths oflandtobeclaimedinthedepopulatedregionoftheSandhillsinwesternNebraska.Forten points,namethis1862actthatallowedAmericanstoclaimpubliclandforfreeaslongas they farmed it.	ANSWER:HomesteadAct of 1862 (acceptHomesteadAct[s])
WhileservingasSecretaryofStateunderthispresident,JohnClaytonnegotiateda treatywithHenryBulweroftheU.K.concerningspheresofinfluenceinCentralAmerica. Thisman’sdaughter,Sarah,marriedJeffersonDaviswhoservedunderthismanattheBattle ofBuenaVista[[BWEH-nahVEES-tah]].ThisWhigdefeatedLewisCassandMartinvan Bureninthe1848U.S.presidentialelection.Fortenpoints,namethisMexican-American War hero who succeeded James K. Polk as president of the United States.	ANSWER: ZacharyTaylor  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 10
DuringtheBellinghamRiotsinWashington,over100peopleofthisfaithwere placedinto"protectivecustody"bytheAsiaticExclusionLeague.Thisfaithnamesan "Empire"whichformedwhenvariousmisl[[MEE-suhl]]statesunitedtotakeadvantageof therapidlydeterioratingMughal[[moo-GAHL]]Empire.Bodyguardsofthisfaith assassinatedIndira[[in-DIH-ruh]]GandhifollowingviolenceinthePunjabduringOperation BlueStar.GobindSingh[[goh-BIHND"SING"]]andGuruNanakled,fortenpoints,which minority faith of India?	ANSWER:Sikhism (orSikhi; acceptSikhs)
Thisone-timestateattorneygeneralarguedinfavorofthedefendantinthecaseVan Ordernv.PerrywhichconcernedaTenCommandmentsmonumentsattheStateHouse.The Anti-DefamationLeaguecensuredthispoliticianforcomparingmassshootingstothe HolocaustaftertheSutherlandSpringstragedy.Thismanprovokedcriticismwhenhe blamedtheunimplemented"GreenNewDeal"forhisstate'spowerplantfailureduringa 2021icestorm.TheTexasHeartbeatActwassignedby,fortenpoints,whichRepublican governor?	ANSWER: GregAbbott(or Gregory WayneAbbott)
ThismantransformedtheItaliancruiserRambIIIintohisownpersonalyacht, Galeb.WiththemonarchistChetniks,thisman'sforcesresistedtheAxiscollaborationist government,includingtheCroatianUstashe[[ooh-STAH-shuh]].TheInformbiro [[in-form-BEE-roh]]PeriodoccurredafterthiscommunistleadersplitwithJosefStalin,and thismanwaslateroneofthefoundersofthe"Non-AlignedMovement."Aunitedsocialist Yugoslavia was led by, for ten points, which commander of the Partisans?	ANSWER: JosipBrozTito(accept either underlinedportion; accept MarshalTito)
Thismancreateda"SpiritThermometer"filledwithliquortobedisplayedinthe courtofhispatron,FerdinandoIIdeMedici.PopeUrbanVIII's[[theeighth's]]inquisitorsled aninvestigationagainstthismanafterhepublished“DialogueConcerningtheTwoChief WorldSystems.”Alegendstellshowthismandroppedtwoballsofdifferentmassesoffthe LeaningTowertotestanAristotelianhypothesis.FourmoonsofJupiterarenamedfor,for ten points, which Italian physicist and astronomer?	ANSWER:GalileoGalilei(orGalileodi Vincenzo Bonaiutide'Galilei; accept either underlined portion)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 10
Followinghisreturnfromexile,thismonarchformallyabandonedtheinstitutionof slaveryin1942inanefforttofinishthereformsofYohannesIV.Thisman,whobannedthe Oromolanguage,wasremovedbythecommunistDergregime.Thisnegus[[NEH-gus]] failedtoresistanItalianinvasioninthe1930s,leadingtohisnation'soccupation.Thefinal emperor of Ethiopia was, for ten points, what monarch, sometimes known asRasTafari?	ANSWER: HaileSelassieI (accept RasTafaribefore mentioned; accept LijTafari Makonnen[/a] before "Tafari"; accept Lij Tafari  before "Tafari"; accept Lij TafariMakonnen)
Thisnation'sprimeminister-in-exilegavethe"CommentsontheInstructions” speech,instructingpublicservantstoresisttheordersofitsReichskommissariat [[RIKES-kohm-ee-SAHR-yaht]].OperationMarketGardenaimedtoliberatethisnationby capturingbridgeheadsacrosstheRhine.DuringtheHolocaust,diaristAnneFrankandher family lived in the "Secret Annex" in the capital city of, for ten points, what European nation?	ANSWER: Kingdom of theNetherlands(or KoninkrijkderNederlanden; acceptHolland)  2021-22 C Set History BowlRound 10
Brigade 2506 was a military group trained by this organization in an attempt to bring the Democratic Revolutionary Front to power in one country. A 1947 National Security Act created this organization which was preceded by the Office of Strategic Services. The Bay of Pigs Invasion, as well as several attempts to assassinate Castro, was planned by, for ten points, what federal agency responsible for gathering overseas intelligence?	ANSWER: CIA(acceptCentralIntelligenceAgency)
Louis XV demanded that this monarch renounce Francis I’s claims to the Duchy of Lorraine in favor of the deposed Stanislaw I of Poland. In the Treaty of Aachen, this monarch was forced to cede Parma to Bourbon Spain. This daughter of Charles VI fought a war with Frederick II which resulted in Prussia seizing control of Silesia. The Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 allowed the ascension of, for ten points, what Empress of Austria?	ANSWER: Empress MariaTheresa
In 1957, Philip Siekevitz popularized a teaching tool regarding this organelle. This organelle names a theorized “Eve” figure who lived 150 thousand years ago; that figure is the matrilineal ancestor of all modern  humans,  because  this  organelle  contains  DNA  typically  only  inherited  from  the  mother.  The Krebs cycle takes place in, for ten points, what organelle that generates ATP and is commonly called the powerhouse of the cell?	ANSWER: mitochondria(acceptmitochondrion)
This leader initiated a series of economic reforms as part of Operation Forward. A mass sterilization campaign was carried out by this leader during the 21-month long Emergency. The Smiling Buddha test was authorized by this leader who ordered a raid on the Golden Temple in Amritsar in Operation Blue Star.  Two  Sikh  bodyguards  assassinated,  for  ten  points,  what  Indian  Prime  Minister,  the  daughter  of Jawaharlal Nehru?	ANSWER: IndiraGandhi(prompt on Gandhi)
Religious  leaders  criticized  this  man  for  holding  Hugo  Chavez’s  mother  at  his  funeral.  This  man, who has used his Twitter to support the University of Michigan football program and lament the death of rapper Nipsey Hussle, sought to develop a peaceful nuclear program in 2007 despite opposition from Ali Khamenei. Hassan Rouhani succeeded, for ten points, what former mayor of Tehran who served from 2005 to 2013 as President of Iran?	ANSWER: Mahmoud Ahmadinejad Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 10
This man will supposedly fight both the al-Masih ad-Dajjal and his followers while dressed in yellow garb near Damascus. According to Al-Tabari, this man healed the son of Phillip the Tetrarch and created birds from clay to entertain children. Several Hadith testimonials and the Quran claim that this man was a product of a virgin birth. For ten points, name this penultimate prophet of Islam and son of Maryam who is considered the Messiah of the Old Testament.	ANSWER: Isaibn Maryam (acceptJesusChrist)
This document’s predecessor was revised by the Annapolis Convention. An issue during the drafting of this document was resolved by the Connecticut Compromise. The beginning of this document promises to  “Promote  the  general  welfare”  and  “Insure  Domestic  Tranquility.”  Edmund  Randolph  and  George Mason refused to sign this document until the introduction of a Bill of Rights. For ten points, name this document, largely written by James Madison, the foundational document of the United States.	ANSWER: United States”Constitution
One example of this musical form was inspired by a cat walking on a harpsichord and was composed by Domenico Scarlatti. Fourteen of these pieces in D minor are labeled “Contrapunctus” in a work titled forThe  Art  of[these  pieces].  Renaissance  music  theorist  Gioseffo  Zarlino  contrasted  these  works  and canons in the 16th century. J.S. Bach wrote a D minor organ piece that pairs one of these works with a “Toccata.” For ten points, name this type of contrapuntal work that is often paired with a prelude.	ANSWER: fugues
This leader tasked Lot Smith to form a militia and eliminate the Timpanogos. The proposed state of “Deseret” was spearheaded by this man, who lost much of his national credibility following the Mountain Meadows  Massacre.  This  leader  banned  black  men  in  his  clergy,  claiming  they  were  sons  of  Cain.  This man took control of a religious group after its founder died in Illinois. The Mormons were led to Utah by, for ten points, what successor of Joseph Smith?	ANSWER: Brigham Young
This man ordered that the coastal village of Tercanabal on the Sangres Peninsula be repopulated so that he could build a villa there. In order to search Africa for Prester John, this man convinced his father to conquer Ceuta in 1415. An expedition led by Gil Eannes, supported by this man, crossed Cape Bojador. For ten points, name this 15th century Portuguese prince whose funding helped start the Age of Discovery.	ANSWER: PrinceHenrytheNavigator Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 10
Trade in this desert declined after the Battle of Tondibi, relegating merchants to routes such as Azalai and Taoudenni. While traveling from Sijilmasa to the Oualata Oasis, Ibn Battuta wrote of how Berber guides were influential in the trade of this desert. The vital Taghaza salt mines were located in this desert, where dromedaries were domesticated for travel. For ten points, name this large desert that Arab traders crossed to reach West Africa.	ANSWER: SaharaDesert
This city was known to the Slavs as Tsargrad. Theodosius II used the help of fans who watched chariot racing  in  this  city’s  Hippodrome  to  build  this  city’s  famous  double  walls.  An  engineer  named  Orban helped build a giant cannon that could fire 600 pound cannonballs; that cannon was used in Mehmed II’s conquest of this city in 1453. For ten points, name this capital of the Byzantine Empire, which was later renamed Istanbul.	ANSWER: Constantinople(do not accept Istanbul or Byzantium)
In 1972, one of these events occurred in the Black Hills and resulted in over 200 deaths. The Stone Fork Fishing and Hunting Club was accused of causing one of these events in 1889 that destroyed Johnstown, Pennsylvania and killed over 2,200 people. President Herbert Hoover dealt with one of these events that made hundreds of thousands of people homeless in 1927. For ten points, name this type of natural disaster that frequently occurs along the Mississippi River.	ANSWER: floods
This painting’s date and the artist’s name are depicted on a handkerchief held by a boy. Two figures on  either  side  of  this  painting’s  title  figure  are  depicted  in  golden  robes.  This  painting  is  noted  for  its distinct  “heaven”  and  “earth”  sections,  the  latter  of  which  depicts  Saint  Stephen  and  Saint  Augustine descending for the title event. For ten points, name this El Greco painting showing the interment of the title nobleman.	ANSWER: The BurialoftheCountofOrgaz(accept ElEntierrodelSenordeOrgaz)
Existing regulations against this group were reinforced by the Poland Act. After suspicions of well poisoning arose, members of this group attacked the Baker-Fancher wagon train in the Mountain Meadows Massacre. With the help of the Quorum of the Twelve, this group left Nauvoo in an attempt to establish the State of Deseret in the Salt Lake Valley. For ten points, name this Utah-based religious group led by Brigham Young and Joseph Smith.	ANSWER: Mormons (accept answers related to the Church of Jesus Christ ofLatter-DaySaintsor LDS) Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 10
A general from this country escaped a purge of high-ranking officers by climbing a wall into an Iraqi embassy. One leader of this country promoted the Nasikom ideology and the five principles, or pancasila, and  was  overthrown  in  1967  before  a  massive  purge  of  Communists.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Asian archipelagic country that was led during the Cold War by Sukarno and Suharto.	ANSWER:Indonesia
The  Supreme  Court  expanded  the  meaning  of  this  clause  inGonzales v. Raich.  Another  case  that relied on this clause wasGibbons v. Ogden, which expanded this clause’s meaning to include navigation. This clause is often held with the Elastic Clause to grant Congress greater power. For ten points, name this section of Article 1 of the Constitution that empowers Congress to regulate the title activity between states.	ANSWER: Interstate CommerceClause of the United States Constitution (acceptArticleI,Section 8,clause3)
This company’s logo was inspired by a tattoo of a star its founder received while serving on theEmily Morgan. A victim of theTitanicsinking, Isidor Strauss, bought this company in 1895. This company’s first location in New York made over $300 on its first day in 1858 and expanded after employing illuminated shopping displays. The flagship store of this brand is in Herald Square in Manhattan. For ten points, name this national department store chain that sponsors an annual Thanksgiving Day parade in New York.	ANSWER: R.H. Macyand Co. (acceptMacy’s Inc.)
This conflict featured an Italian naval intervention that was thwarted at Lissa in the first sea battle between  ironclad  fleets.  Albrecht  von  Roon  opened  the  draft  to  all  male  citizens  prior  to  this  conflict, which broke out after one side violated the Gastein Convention. This conflict was decided at the battle of Sadowa, which allowed the winners to take control of Schleswig and Holstein. For ten points, name this 1866 war in which Prussia defeated Austria within two months.	ANSWER: SevenWeeks’War (acceptAustro-PrussianWar before “Prussia” is read; prompt on it afterward; prompt on Unification War; prompt on German (Civil) War)
In  Vedic  Hinduism,  this  substance  is  the  center  of  theyajnaritual.  Zoroastrians  protect  this substance,  calledatar,  in  temples  named  for  it.  In  1861,  Queen  Victoria  banned  the  practice  ofsati, whereby  Hindu  widows  would  kill  themselves  with  this  substance.  This  substance  is  personified  by  the Hindu god Agni. For ten points, name this substance which, in Greek myth, Prometheus stole from the gods and gave to humans.	ANSWER: fire Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 10
In this country, a rock garden with sculptures made from recycled waste and a steel sculpture of an open  hand  are  found  in  sectors  of  one  city.  The  first  Prime  Minister  of  this  country  commissioned  Le Corbusier to design that planned city, Chandigarh. Another monument in this country is named for the colored  sandstone  it  was  built  with  when  the  capital  was  moved  from  Agra.  For  ten  points,  name  this country where Mughal rulers once used the Peacock Throne in the Red Fort in Delhi.	ANSWER: Republic of India
This group secured power in Chelmno Land after its natives agreed to the Treaty of Christburg. This group  expanded  operations  in  Prussia  at  the  request  of  Konrad  of  Masovia.  This  group  failed  to  take Pskov from Alexander Nevsky after being defeated on Lake Peipus in the Battle of the Ice. The influence of this group declined after losing at Grunwald to Poland-Lithuania. For ten points, name this group of German crusaders.	ANSWER: TeutonicOrder(orTeutonicKnights;  acceptOrderofBrothersoftheGerman HouseofSaintMaryinJerusalem)
Development along the Tuolumne[to-all-um-nee] River in this state was unsuccessfully opposed by John Muir. The O’Shaughnessy Dam filled up this state’s Hetch Hetchy Valley in 1923. Glacier Point and Vernal Fall are located in a national park in this state on the west side of the Sierra Nevada mountains. Half Dome was photographed numerous times by Ansel Adams in, for ten points, what US state that is home to Yosemite National Park?	ANSWER: California
The ban liang coin was standardized under this man’s chancellor Li Si, who forged a letter ordering this  man’s  son  Fusu  to  commit  suicide.  This  man  survived  an  assassination  attempt  in  which  a  blind musician struck out at him with a heavy lute. The ascension of this man marked the end of the Warring States  period,  and  he  was  buried  alongside  thousands  of  terracotta  warriors.  For  ten  points,  name  this first emperor of the Qin dynasty.	ANSWER: Qin ShiHuangdi
Mary Dyer was hanged in this city, making her one of this city’s three namesake martyrs. In a lawsuit involving this city and its northern suburb, Daniel Webster argued against the Warren Bridge Company in the Charles River Bridge case. A 1773 incident in this city led to the Coercive Acts and began when men boarded theBeaverand other ships dressed as Mohawk Indians. For ten points, name this city where Samuel Adams led a disruptive Tea Party.	ANSWER: Boston Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 10
This president rejected Texas’ first application for annexation. This politician led the Albany Regency, a group of New York politicians, and his supposedly lavish lifestyle in the White House was attacked by Charles Ogle in the Gold Spoon Oration. This man ordered Winfield Scott to carry out his predecessor’s Indian Removal Act, causing the Trail of Tears. For ten points, name this US president who succeeded Andrew Jackson.	ANSWER: Martin VanBuren
This discipline’s focus was shifted onto social constructions, rather than observables, by Giambattista Vico’sverum factumprinciple.  The  “heroic”  in  this  discipline  was  discussed  by  Thomas  Carlyle,  who developed  a  “Great  Man”  theory  of  it.  Authors  in  this  field’s  Dunning  School  promoted  a  “lost  cause” narrative of the Confederacy in school textbooks. For ten points, name this study of humanity’s past.	ANSWER:history(accept more descriptive answers, such as “the philosophy ofhistory”; do not accept philosophy alone; do not acept historiography)
The  beginning  of  this  event  was  signalled  with  the  phrase,  “crack  the  sky,  shake  the  Earth,”  and it continued in the May Offensive. One theory suggests the Battle of Khe Sanh was a diversion for this event, in which blacklisted civilians were buried alive in Hue [Hway]. This operation led to the infiltration of the U.S. embassy in Saigon by Viet Cong guerillas. The breaking of the Lunar New Year truce started, for ten points, what 1968 offensive that caused U.S. public opinion to turn against the Vietnam War?	ANSWER:TetOffensive
In 2010, nine activists trying to bring aid to this territory were killed when their “Freedom Flotilla” was raided. This region’s southwest border lies on the narrow Philadelphia Corridor, which is patrolled by an Egyptian Border Guard Force. In 2005, all Israeli settlements in this region were vacated, as were four  in  the  West  Bank.  For  ten  points,  name  this  self-governing  Palestinian  territory,  a  strip  along  the Mediterranean Sea.	ANSWER: GazaStrip (prompt on Palestine)
The towns of Hastings and Rye received tax exemptions in exchange for maintaining these objects as part of a group of five protected cities. Sutton Hoo is the site of a buried, undisturbed one of these objects from the 7th century. Henry I’s son William Adelin was killed in a disaster involving one of these vehicles, which were used during raids on English monasteries. For ten points, name these vehicles built in Southampton and other English port cities.	ANSWER:ships (acceptboats; acceptlongshipafter Sutton Hoo is said) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 10
During one of these campaigns, a king died with his son John Tristan, who had been born in Damietta during a different one of these campaigns. The leader of one of these campaigns, Simon de Montfort, was killed while besieging Toulouse. The Albigensian one of these conflicts defeated the Cathars in the south of France, and Louis IX was canonized for his efforts in the seventh and eighth ones of these against Egypt and Tunisia. For ten points, name these conflicts, called by the Pope, that targeted religious enemies.	ANSWER: crusades
One  composer  from  this  modern-day  country  wrote  a  tone  poem  depicting  its  castle  of  Vysehrad [vish-eh-rahd] and another piece inspired by the St. John’s Rapids. This nation is depicted in the six-part cycleMa  vlast,  whose  best-known  portion  depicts  the  Vltava  River,  or  Moldau.  Bedrich  Smetana  and Antonin  Dvorak [duh-VORE-zhok]  are  from,  for  ten  points,  what  modern-day  country  whose  capital  is Prague?	ANSWER: CzechRepublic(orCzechia)
This man was appointed to a command after the death of his superior, Frederick Funston. He put down  the  Moro  Rebellion  and  introduced  a  boot  for  use  in  trenches.  This  general  led  an  expedition  to capture Pancho Villa and, on arrival in another war, declared that “Lafayette, we are here” before fighting in  the  Hundred  Days  offensive.  For  ten  points,  name  this  General  of  the  Armies  who  commanded  U.S. forces during World War I and was nicknamed “Black Jack.”	ANSWER: John “Black Jack” Pershing
A player who won a Super Bowl for this team started his career under a 43-year, $40 million contract with the USFL. That man replaced a quarterback on this team who threw “The Catch” to Dwight Clark in the 1982 NFC Championship Game. During the 2016 preseason, this team’s backup quarterback refused to stand for the national anthem, beginning a national protest movement. For ten points, name this NFL team whose quarterbacks have included Steve Young, Joe Montana, and Colin Kaepernick.	ANSWER: SanFrancisco49ers(accept either or both)
This man called the Turnip Day session and attacked the “do-nothing” Eightieth Congress for failing to pass legislation. The Conservative Coalition opposed this architect of a “Fair Deal,” whose veto of the Taft-Hartley Act was overridden by Congress. This President negotiated at the Potsdam Conference after he replaced his late predecessor. “The buck stopped” at the desk of, for ten points, what U.S. President who oversaw the end of World War II?	ANSWER: Harry S. Truman Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 10
This  man’s  wife,  Katharina  von  Bora,  was  forced  to  evacuate  the  Black  Cloister  during  the Schmalkaldic War. This man received the protection of Frederick III of Saxony and debated Zwingli in the  Marburg  Colloquy.  This  critic  of  Johann  Tetzel  was  excommunicated  at  the  Diet  of  Worms  after protesting the sale of indulgences on the door of Wittenberg Cathedral. For ten points, name this German monk whose Ninety-Five Theses started the Protestant Reformation.	ANSWER: Martin Luther
The over-creation of these parts of speech through the use of derivational morphology creates their “zombie”  type.  Socrates  defined  these  parts  of  speech  as  “onoma”  in  theCratylus.  Classifiers  on  these types of speech are found in Chinese and Turkish to add quantifiers. Articles are sometimes placed before these parts of speech in English in order to start a type of “phrase” contrasted with verb phrases. For ten points, name this part of speech, often defined as including persons, places, things, or ideas.	ANSWER:nouns
This  state  claims  Machias  Seal  Island,  and  the  oldest  national  park  east  of  the  Mississippi  is  on its  Mount  Desert  Island.  Its  Baxter  State  Park  is  home  to  Mount  Kathadin,  and  it  is  home  to  Acadia National  Park.  Part  of  its  northern  border  was  set  at  the  St.  John’s  River  by  the  Webster-Ashburton Treaty, which settled the Aroostook War. The Appalachian Trail’s northern end is in, for ten points, what U.S. state that was originally part of Massachusetts in the north of New England?	ANSWER: Maine
This man killed the Sheriff of Lanark, William Heselrig, at Lanark. Blind Harry chronicled the life of this man, an ally of Andrew Moray. John de Menteith captured this man, who was hung, drawn, and quartered  in  1305.  This  subject  of  John  Balliol  was  defeated  at  Falkirk,  inspiring  Robert  the  Bruce  to take up his cause. For ten points, name this opponent of Edward Longshanks and winner at the Battle of Stirling Bridge, a hero of Scottish independence.	ANSWER: William Wallace
This rebellion was inspired by the pamphlet “Good Words for Exhorting the Age” and originated among the Hakka people. The Ever Victorious Army was essential in putting down this rebellion under the  leadership  of  General  Gordon,  who  gained  a  nickname  from  that  campaign.  This  rebellion’s  leader, a  man  who  claimed  to  be  the  younger  brother  of  Jesus,  was  found  dead  in  his  palace  in  Nanjing.  For ten  points,  name  this  19th  century  rebellion,  led  by  Hong  Xiuquan,  that  tried  to  establish  a  Heavenly Kingdom in China.	ANSWER: TaipingRebellion (accept synonyms, like uprising or civil war) Page 2  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 10
In  1979,  Carol  Petillo  revealed  that  this  man  accepted  500,000  dollars  from  President  Quezon  one week before his forces began a three month defense of Luzon, followed by the Bataan death march and his retreat to Australia. For ten points, name this American general who led the island hopping campaign in the Pacific theater of World War II after declaring “I shall return” to the Philippines.	ANSWER: DouglasMacArthur
Malcolm Gladwell’sThe Tipping Pointdiscusses how this city’s rate of violent crimes was decreased by stricter rules on minor crimes, as predicted by “broken window” theory. In 1964, Winston Moseley shot a woman from this city who was unable to get help despite several onlookers. For ten points, name this city where the bystander effect led to Kitty Genovese’s death in its borough of Queens.	ANSWER: NewYorkCity orNYC
Warning: two answers required. These two countries planned, but never took, a joint voyage to map a  boundary  defined  as  370  leagues  west  of  Cape  Verde.  These  two  countries  debated  ownership  of  the Indonesian  Molucca  Islands  until  the  1529  Treaty  of  Zaragoza,  35  years  after  they  divided  New  World territory in the Treaty of Tordesillas[torr-de-SEE-ess]. For ten points, name these two countries on the Iberian peninsula in southwestern Europe.	ANSWER: SpainandPortugal(accept in either order; do not prompt on partial answer; accept Castille for Spain)
This  monarch  employed  Chancellor  John  Morton  and  defeated  a  rebellion  at  the  Battle  of  Stoke; that rebellion was led by pretender Lambert Simnel. This monarch, who established the Star Chamber, defeated a Yorkist king with the help of the Stanley brothers at one battle.This man defeated the forces of Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth Field, ending the Wars of the Roses. For ten points, name this first Tudor monarch and father of Henry VIII.	ANSWER: HenryVII(prompt on Henry Tudor before “Tudor” is mentioned)
Rafael Bombelli is regarded as the “inventor” of these numbers, since he developed the rules for their arithmetic  operations.  It  is  useful  to  color-code  graphs  of  functions  that  contain  these  numbers,  since those graphs have four dimensions. Euler’s formula equates “e to the i theta” to a number of this type. For ten points, give this type of number that has both real and imaginary components.	ANSWER: complexnumbers
This man described Germans as “swarthy,” even though he had published the first German-language newspaper  in  America.  He  served  as  the  first  ambassador  to  Sweden  without  travelling  there,  and  he advocated for the colonies to join the Albany Plan by creating a cartoon of a snake divided into pieces titled “Join or Die”. For ten points, name this American Founding Father who wrote and printedPoor Richard’s Almanac.	ANSWER: Benjamin Franklin Page 1  NHBB C-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 10
With  Fred  Archer,  this  artist  gave  pure  white  a  value  of  ten  in  the  Zone  System.  He  showed Japanese-Americans  at  Manzanar  in  his  workBorn Free and Equal,  and  with  Willard  Van  Dyke  and Edward Weston, he formed the group f/64. This artist captured images of El Capitan and a round granite formation in Yosemite National Park. For ten points, name this photographer ofMoon and Half Dome.	ANSWER: Ansel EastonAdams
Elias Boudinot and John Ridge were executed for their part in negotiations that led to this event. George Gained was appointed to oversee this event, which came after the signing of the Treaty of New Echota and led to the death of thousands of members of the Five Civilized Tribes, including the Cherokee, along a route to modern Oklahoma. For ten points, name this forced relocation of Native Americans to the Indian Territory in the 1830’s.	ANSWER: TrailofTears(prompt  on  descriptions  of  Native  American  removal;  accept  the  Treaty  of New Echota during the first sentence)
This thinker explained a cultural absence of rape and jealousy, as well as overall lower levels of stress, by noting a casual social view regarding sexuality. Derek Freeman controversially criticized this thinker’s study of adolescent females on the Pacific island of Ta’u, which she visited while studying under Franz Boas. For ten points, name this American anthropologist, the author ofComing of Age in Samoa.	ANSWER: Margaret Mead
Ahmad Shah Durrani established his capital in this present-day country, from which Babur conquered the Lodi Dynasty. The 1st century Kushan Empire ruled from what is now this country’s city of Bagram. Two massive statues of the Buddha in this country’s Bamiyan Valley were dynamited in 2001. The Khyber Pass connects this country to its eastern neighbor, Pakistan. For ten points, name this country once ruled by the Taliban.	ANSWER: Islamic Republic ofAfghanistan
This man wrote against slavery in one city's Gazette under aliases like "Vindex" and “Candidus.” Following the arrival of the Dartmouth this man and James Otis distributed the "circular  letter"  to  organize  a  meeting  at  Faneuil  [[FAN-yoo-il]]  Hall.  Many  years  after  his best  known  action,  this  man  succeeded  John  Hancock  to  become  the  fourth  governor  of Massachusetts. For ten points, name this Founding Father and leader of the Sons of Liberty who orchestrated the Boston Tea Party.	ANSWER: Samuel Adams (prompt on “Adams”)
This  polity's  ruling  family  came  to  power  after  its  scion,  Francesco  the  Malicious, captured its chief fortress while disguised as a Franciscan monk. In 2015, the prince of this polity apologized for its role in the deportation of 90 Jews during the Holocaust. That prince is  the  child  of  this  country's  Prince  Rainier  III  and  American  actress  Grace  Kelly.  The Grimaldi  family  has  traditionally  ruled,  for  ten  points,  what  wealthy  city-state  on  the Franco-Italian border known for its yearly Grand Prix?	ANSWER: Principality of Monaco (or Múnegu; or Principauté de Monaco; or Prinçipatu de Múnegu)
According  to  Pliny  the  Elder, a  red  stone  named  after  this  deity  was  able  to  reflect images.  According  to  Homer  in  the Odyssey, this deity was “loved more than any place on earth” on the island of Lemnos, which was traditionally the cult center of this god. An altar dedicated to this deity is sometimes referred to by the people of Elis as the altar of “warlike Zeus.” The Chalceia [[chahl-KAY-ah]] festival, in which "peplos" garments were woven from a loom, was dedicated to Athena and this deity. For ten points, what deity was the primary target of worship for Greek blacksmiths and craftsmen?	ANSWER: Hephaestus (or Hephaistos; do not accept or prompt on “Vulcan”)
A  representative  from  this  state  was  accused  in  2021  of  violating  the  Mann  Act  by transporting  a  minor  across  state  lines for  "immoral  purposes."  In  2022,  this  state's governor  was  caught  on  film  saying  "we  gotta  stop  with  this  Covid  theater"  after  children wore  masks  during  a  press  conference.  In  March  2022,  this  state  passed  a  law  that  barred teaching  an  elementary  school  "LGBT"  curriculum  with  the  "Don't  Say  Gay"  bill.  For  ten points, Matt Gaetz and Ron DeSantis are politicians from what Southern U.S. state?	ANSWER: Florida  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 1
A  fixture  on  the  Rouen  [[roo-EHN]]  Cathedral  is  known  as  the  "[This  Commodity] Tower"  due  to  having  been  built  by  churchgoers  who  gave  up  this  item  up  for  Lent. Propagandist  Joseph  Goebbels  stated,  "One  cannot  shoot  with  [this  commodity],  but  with guns"  in  a  speech  justifying  peacetime  rationing.  A  challenge  by  Napoleon  III  to  invent  a substitute  for this  foodstuff  for  the  poor  led  to  the  invention  of  margarine.  Described  by Pliny  as  "the  most  delicate  of  food  among  barbarous  nations,"  for  ten  points,  what  is  this dairy product made by churning?	ANSWER: Butter (accept Butter Tower; prompt on "Dairy" before mentioned)
Teenagers  dressed  like  this  man  and  formed  neighborhood  gangs  in  a  namesake 1950s subculture in the Belgian Congo. A Beatles song inspired by the "Bungalow" version of this man asks him, “What did you kill?” In the musical Annie  Get  Your  Gun,  this  man attempts to persuade Annie Oakley to join his company in the song, “There’s No Business Like Show Business.” For ten points, what American showman was famed for his cowboy- themed Wild West show?	ANSWER: Buffalo Bill (or William Frederick Cody; accept Buffalo Bill's Wild West)
Sailors  from  this  city  established  the  port  of  Parthenope  [[par-THEH-noh-peh]]  in Magna  Graecia,  eventually  becoming  modern  Naples.  Ancient  theories  on  why  eclipses occur   are   outlined   in The   History   of   Astronomy by Eudemus   [[YOO-deh-muss]],   a philosopher  from  this  city.  Ptolemy  III  offered  to  rebuild  a  bronze  statue  which  collapsed into this city-state's harbor due to a 226 BCE earthquake. For ten points, name this ancient Greek city-state off the coast of Anatolia that possessed a wonder of the ancient world, the bronze Colossus.	ANSWER: Rhodes (or Rhodos; accept Eudemus of Rhodes; accept Colossus of Rhodes)
The historical "Sultanate of Women" period began due to the influence of this man's wife, Roxelana. Despite an overwhelming troop disparity, this man's forces failed to capture the  island  of  Malta  in  1565.  This  man  succeeded  Selim  the  Grim  and  warred  with  the Safavids  under  Tahmasp  I.  This  victor  at  the  Battle  of  Mohacs  [[MOH-hahtch]]  was  later repelled  at  the 1529  Siege  of  Vienna.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  sultan  of  the  Ottoman Empire known as “The Magnificent”	ANSWER: Suleiman the Magnificent (or Suleiman I; or Süleyman-ı Evvel; or Suleiman the Lawgiver; or Ḳānūnī Sulṭān Süleymān)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 1
In  this  kingdom,  Savoyard  mason  Master  James  of  Saint  George  built  a  ring  of fortifications, including Beaumaris [[boh-mah-REH]], following the passage of the Statute of Rhuddlan.  Rhys  Gethin  [[REES  GEH-tihn]]  and  a  national  hero  of  this  kingdom,  Owain Glendower,  defeated  the forces  of  Henry  IV  at  the  Battle  of  Stalling  Down.  A  ruler  of  this region's  kingdom  of  Powys  [[POW-iss]],  Llywelyn  [[loo-ELL-in]]  the  Last,  swore  fealty  to Edward  I  following  the English conquest  of  this modern country.  For  ten  points,  name  this constituent country of the United Kingdom whose name appears in the Princely title of the heir to the English throne.	ANSWER: Kingdom of Wales (or Cymru; accept Prince of Wales; accept Kingdom of Powys before mentioned)
Sarah  Hopkins  Bradford  wrote  two  biographies  of  this  woman,  including Scenes From the Life of [this  person].  This  woman  led  the  forces  of  James  Montgomery  in  the  Raid on the Combahee Ferry during the U.S. Civil War. In 2016, in a decision that was later put on hold,  Treasury  Secretary  Jack  Lew  announced  that  this  woman  would  replace  Andrew Jackson  on  the  front  of  the  twenty-dollar  bill.  For  ten  points,  name  this  abolitionist  and Underground Railroad conductor who was known as the “Moses of her People.”	ANSWER: Harriet Tubman (or Araminta Ross; prompt on "Moses")   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 1
William   Juxon   recorded   this   man's   last   speech,   and   John   Cook   declared   the prosecution  of  this  man  as  fighting  "tyranny  itself."  Some  of  this  man's  last  words  before reaching  the  Banqueting  House  were  to  his  children,  Henry  of Oatlands  and  Elizabeth Stuart. Colonel Francis Hacker took this man to his death, before which this man cryptically uttered   "remember."   Either   William   Hulet   or   Richard   Brandon   were   responsible   for beheading, for ten points, what English king, the only one to be executed?	ANSWER: Charles I
Adrastus,  King  of  Argos,  vows  to  never  invade  this  city  at  the  end  of  the  play The Suppliants.  This  city’s  leader,  Peisistratus,  funded  its  Dionysia  festivals,  during  which Thespis became the first named man to represent a character on stage. In a namesake play, a  resident  of  this  city-state  named  Lysistrata  plots  to  halt  the  ongoing  Peloponnesian  War by  convincing  Greek  wives  to  stop  sleeping  with  their  husbands.  For  ten  points,  name  this city-state, the home of Aristophanes, whose Theatre of Dionysus was built on its Acropolis.	ANSWER: Athens
This man became known as the “Marble Model” due to his low number of demerits at West Point and his statuesque demeanor. This man's order to dig ditches around one city led  him to be called the “King of Spades,” and this man's extreme caution in battle led his soldiers to refer to him as “Granny.” During the West Virginia campaign, this man was given the sobriquet “Evacuating” after a defeat at Cheat Mountain. Preceded as a general  by  his father who was himself nicknamed “Light-Horse," for ten points, who was this Confederate Civil War general?	ANSWER: Robert E(dward) Lee
Thomas van Orden challenged the display of the Ten Commandments in this state's Capitol. During the tenure of a governor of this state who also served as Secretary of Energy under  Donald  Trump,  a  thirteen-hour  filibuster  against  the  anti-abortion  Senate  Bill  5  was launched by Wendy Davis. In 2021, a senator from this state came under fire for travelling to  a Ritz-Carlton  in  Mexico  while  over  4.3  million  of  this  state's  citizens  were  without power. Rick Perry and Ted Cruz are both politicians from, for ten points, what U.S. state?	ANSWER: Texas  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 1
Heather  Penney  and  Marc  Sasseville  were  tasked  with  thwarting the  initial  goal  of this  event,  and  Mike  Pence  carries  a  copy  of A Life of Integrity with  him  when  he  travels  in order  to  commemorate  this  event.  Resistance  from  a  group  of  40  crew  members  and passengers   during   this   event   forced   the   central   vehicle   down   in Somerset   County, Pennsylvania.  For  ten  points,  name  this  event  involving  the  hijacking  of  a  plane  that terrorists intended to crash into Washington, D.C, after similar attacks on the Pentagon and the Twin Towers.	ANSWER: Hijacking of United Airlines Flight 93 (prompt on "9/11" attacks; accept synonyms for "Hijacking")
In this state, the Society for the Suppression of Vice encouraged a police raid of the Everard Baths. Over two dozen men were arrested in this state's anti-gay Ariston Bathhouse raid.  This  state  banned  sexual  orientation  discrimination  via  the  SONDA,  and  this  state legalized  same-sex  marriage  in  the  Marriage  Equality  Act  in  2011.  Dick  Leitsch  [[LEECH]] led a "Sip-in" in this state, and Dave van Ronk was barricaded in a bar during protests in this state's Greenwich Village. For ten points, name this state in which the Stonewall Riots took place.	ANSWER: New York
This  country  attempted  to  overthrow  Raúl  Leoni  in  the  Machurucuto  Incident  in Venezuela.  This  country,  which  led  Operation  Carlota,  won  the  Battle  of  Quifangondo  with the MPLA while fighting South African Defense Forces in Angola. Due to the end of Comecon [[KOH-meh-kohn]], this country faced the Maleconazo protests and shifted to organopónicos agriculture  during  its  Special  Period.  One  key  leader  in  the  overthrow  of  this  country's Fulgencio  Batista  was  Argentine  revolutionary  Che  Guevara.  For  ten  points,  name  this Caribbean island nation.	ANSWER: Republic of Cuba (or República de Cuba)
A historian from this country was told, “Your  criticism  of  me  would  damage  your reputation as a historian, if you had one” during a 1961 debate. That historian from this country   verified   that   Hitler   did   not   escape   Berlin   in   the   late   days   of   the   war   and controversially  claimed  that  the  supposed  Hitler  Diaries  were  real.  A.J.P.  Taylor,  who  was from this country, created popular television lectures that led to him being compared with this  country's  Thomas  Babington  Macaulay.  For  ten  points,  name  this  country  in  which history broadcasts were run by the BBC.	ANSWER: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (accept UK; accept Great Britain; accept England)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 1
In  1811,  this  state's  "revolution  from  above"  freed  serfs,  allowing  peasants  to  own farmland  through  the  Edict  of  Regulation.  This  state  was  addressed  in  the  1813  "To  my People"  speech,  and  Stein  and  Hardenberg  reformed  this  state,  as  did  Theodor  von  Schön [[SHUHN]].  This  state  created  Berlin  University,  where  Johann  Gottlieb  Fichte  [[FIK-tuh]] taught.  When  this  state's  Queen  Louise  died,  Napoleon  claimed  the  king  lost  "his  best minister." Wilhelm von Humboldt created the new humanism movement in, for ten points, what German kingdom?	ANSWER: Kingdom of Prussia (accept Königreich Preussen)
During this man's presidency the House launched an investigation into the conduct of  General  James  Wilkinson.  This  man  disapproved  of  the  1809  Treaty  of  Fort  Wayne,  an agreement to purchase Native American land which led to the outbreak of Tecumseh’s War. This man was forced to evacuate the White House due to a British invasion of Washington, D.C.  during  the  War  of  1812.  For  ten  points,  name  this  man  who  succeeded  Thomas Jefferson and served as America’s fourth president.	ANSWER: James Madison, Jr.   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 1
This ruler won battles at the Hellespont and Chrysopolis to put down a revolt led by Licinius. At one battle, this man claimed he saw a Chi-Rho in the sky with the words “in this sign, you will conquer.” Maxentius was defeated by this man at the Battle of Milvian Bridge. The Edict of Milan, which granted tolerance to Christians, was issued by this emperor. For ten points, name this “Great” Roman Emperor, the first to convert to Christianity.	ANSWER: Constantinethe Great (acceptConstantineI)
This island’s Deltaterrasserne[“delta”-”terra”-sern] site was inhabited by the Independence I and II cultures. Archaeologists discovered the ruins of the Saqqaq culture around this island’s Disko Bay. The northernmost point of this island is named after philanthropist Morris Jesup. The US Air Force maintains Thule Base on this island, where over 30% of the population lives in the capital, Nuuk. For ten points, name this largest island in the world, an autonomous country within Denmark.	ANSWER: Greenland(orKalaallitNunaat)
A  portion  of  this  modern-day  state  was  organized  into  the  self-governing  Cimarron  Territory  by settlers  who  moved  before  the  land  was  surveyed.  Inhabitants  of  what  became  this  state  proposed  the State of Sequoyah. Several Native American tribes were forced to move to Indian Territory in this state during the Trail of Tears. For ten points, name this state where “Sooners” founded cities like Tulsa.	ANSWER: Oklahoma
Golden examples of these objects are reflected on a black background in “Aftermath of Obliteration of Eternity,” one of Yayoi Kusama’s Infinity Mirror Rooms. Man Ray depicted five of these objects in a 1930 “Rayograph,” which he created by using these objects and photosensitive paper. Near the center of Picasso’s  war  protest  paintingGuernica,  one  of  these  objects  explodes  near  the  ceiling.  For  ten  points, name these luminescent household objects developed by Thomas Edison.	ANSWER:lightbulbs (acceptbulbs; acceptlamps)
This group killed thousands of people in the Sinjar Massacre, which targeted Yazidis in the region of Nineveh. On October 27, 2019, the leader of this group committed suicide after being cornered in the Idlib province of Syria; he was replaced by Abu Ibrahim al-Hashimi, whose precise identity is still unconfirmed. Abu  Bakr  al-Baghdadi  led,  for  ten  points,  what  Wahhabist  terrorist  group  that,  at  its  height  in  2015, controlled parts of Syria and Iraq?	ANSWER:ISIS (orISIL; acceptIslamicStateof Iraq and Syria; acceptIslamicStateof Iraq and the Levant; acceptDaesh) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
This  President  signed  an  Agricultural  Marketing  Act  that  created  a  Federal  Farm  Board,  a  plan opposed  to  the  controversial-yet-popular  McNary-Haugen  plan.  This  man’s  administration  began  a multi-billion dollar intervention program called the Reconstruction Finance Corporation that gave loans to railroads and banks, an active response to the nation’s worst economic performance of the 20th century. For  ten  points,  name  this  US  President  who  was  replaced  during  the  Great  Depression  by  Franklin Roosevelt.	ANSWER: Herbert Hoover
This object, which contains a decree from an assembly of priests in Canopus, was given the designation EA24  in  the  British  Museum.  Pierre-Francois  Bouchard  discovered  this  object  at  Fort  Julien  during a  Napoleonic  campaign.  This  object,  the  most  visited  item  in  the  British  Museum,  was  studied  by Jean-Francois Champollion, whose work ushered in modern Egyptology. For ten points, name this slab of rock whose inscribed Greek and Demotic texts helped decipher Egyptian hieroglyphics.	ANSWER: RosettaStone
In 1603, an ice floe destroyed this city’s first permanent bridge, which connected it to thejurydyka of  Praga.  A  shoemaker  named  Jan  Kilinski  led  the  armed  peasantry  of  this  city  against  the  occupying Russian Empire in a 1794 uprising. J ̈urgen Stroop suppressed an uprising in this city, eventually sending most  of  the  rebels  to  Treblinka  and  other  death  camps.  A  1943  ghetto  uprising  took  place  in,  for  ten points, what capital city of Poland?	ANSWER: Warsaw
After winning this event in 1987, Harry Carson dumped a bucket of popcorn over President Reagan’s head  at  the  White  House.  CEO  Jed  York  claimed  to  have  “pulled  the  plug”  on  one  of  these  events  in 2013,  refuting  Ray  Lewis’  claim  that  the  power  outage  at  the  Louisiana  Superdome  was  a  conspiracy. For ten points, name this event, annually the most-watched television program in the United States, that determines the champion of the NFL.	ANSWER: SuperBowl(acceptSuperBowl21 and/or 47; prompt on descriptive answers of the NFL’s championship game)
After this ruler ignored a plea for peace, John Dickinson drafted a “Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms.” This monarch appointed Lord Rockingham as Prime Minister in favor of Lord Grenville. The Olive Branch Petition was rejected by this ruler, who later was forced to accept peace with the United States after Lord Cornwallis’s men surrendered at Yorktown. For ten points, name this British king during the American Revolution.	ANSWER: GeorgeIII(prompt on George) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
Two weeks after a Robert Geiger news story coined a name for this event, Hugh Bennett was made director of a new agency within the Interior Department. This event prompted the Soil Conservation Act, as it was partly caused by cattle overgrazing. Dorothea Lange’s iconic photographMigrant Motherdepicts a  family  fleeing,  for  ten  points,  what  event  in  which  “Okies”  attempted  to  move  to  California  to  avoid severe drought during the Great Depression?	ANSWER: DustBowl(prompt on Great Depression)
Genseric captured this city after his betrothal to Eudocia was broken, and Alaric was able to capture this city after the death of Stilicho. The Battle of the Allia led to the capture of this city, which was forced to measure out ransom money using weighted scales by Brennus. Romulus Augustulus was deposed after the capture of this city in 476 AD. For ten points, name this city that was sacked several times during the fall of its Italy-based empire.	ANSWER: Rome
This kingdom was briefly controlled by Britain after the arrival of the HMSCarysfortin the Paulet Affair. Because Kalakaua had been intimidated into giving his power away, this kingdom’s legal code was known as the Bayonet Constitution. Sanford Dole was appointed president of this kingdom shortly before it was annexed by William McKinley in 1898. For ten points, name this kingdom, that was ruled by Queen Liliuokalani and became the 50th US state.	ANSWER: Kingdom of Hawai’i
In what became known as this city’s “mile,” a group of troops including Randall Ramaglia walked through RPG fire to a rally point at National Street. William Garrison commanded troops in a battle in this city that was part of the larger Operation Gothic Serpent; in that battle, troops under Mohammad Farah  Aidid  shot  down  two  Black  Hawk  helicopters.  For  ten  points,  name  this  site  of  a  1993  battle involving Delta Force, the capital of Somalia.	ANSWER: Mogadishu(acceptHamar)
This leader’s promotion of pro-feminist policies was noted with the statement “Women hold up half the sky.” This man began the Anti-Rightist Campaign after severe criticism led him to undo the Hundred Flowers Movement. In a failed attempt to modernize, this man encouraged peasants to create backyard furnaces  during  the  Great  Leap  Forward,  which  began  in  1958.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Communist chairman of China.	ANSWER: MaoZedong Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
This President’s doctrine pledged support to Middle Eastern governments, including military support for Camille Chamoun of Lebanon. Earl Warren was appointed as Chief Justice by this president a year beforeBrown v. Board of Educationoverturned the doctrine of “separate but equal.” This president sent members of 101st Airborne Division to escort the Little Rock Nine. For ten points, name this president and former World War II Supreme Allied Commander.	ANSWER: Dwight D(avid) “Ike” Eisenhower
Members of this religious movement follow a ruleset called the Ordnung. One of the most conservative sects of this religious group, based in Nebraska, is known for its brown clothing. Some young people from this religious group are allowed to disobey norms in an exploratory period called Rumspringa. Lancaster County,  Pennsylvania  was  a  migration  site  for  many  members  of,  for  ten  points,  what  religious  group known for living without the conveniences of modern technology?	ANSWER: theAmish(prompt on Mennonites; prompt on Anabaptists)
In this work, a character recounts the tale of a man named Er who revives on his funeral pyre and shares an account of the afterlife. A character in this work tries to explain the psyche by asking Glaucon to  imagine  a  divided  line  and  imagines  a  ring  that  makes  the  wearer  invisible,  the  Ring  of  Gyges.  The Allegory of the Cave and the benefits of rule under a “philosopher-king” are described in, for ten points, what Platonic dialogue about justice and forms of government like oligarchy and democracy?	ANSWER: The Republic(orPoliteia)
The  “United  Empire”  faction  of  these  people  consisted  of  members  who  migrated  to  Canadian provinces.  These  people  were  led  into  combat  by  Patrick  Ferguson,  where  they  were  defeated  at  Kings Mountain.  A  considerable  population  of  North  and  South  Carolina  consisted  of  these  people,  whom Charles Cornwallis hoped to gain the support of during his campaign there. For ten points, give this term for American colonists who supported Great Britain during the Revolution.	ANSWER: Loyalists (acceptTories; acceptRoyalists; acceptKing’sMen; accept descriptive answers that use the wordloyal)
This battle was fought concurrently with an engagement at Wavre[wahv], leading to the absence of Emmanuel Grouchy. This battle is commemorated by the Lion’s Mound, where a commander was shot off his horse. The arrival of Gebhard von Blucher’s Prussians helped turn the tide of this battle, which ended the Hundred Days and forced its loser into exile in St. Helena. For ten points, name this 1815 battle in which Wellington defeated Napoleon for the last time.	ANSWER: Battle ofWaterloo Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
In this city, Roland Freiser presided over the extra-judicial People’s Court. The communist Marinus van der Lubbe was convicted of arson in this city in 1933. This city’s Gauleiter for two decades was Joseph Goebbels, and a famous photo taken by Yevgeny Khaldei shows a soldier raising a Soviet flag over this city’s Reichstag. The F ̈uhrerbunker was constructed in, for ten points, what capital city of Nazi Germany?	ANSWER:Berlin
Billy Mitchell tirelessly promoted the use of these objects in warfare following his dismissal from the military. Traveling performers who made use of these objects in the 1920s became known as barnstormers. A wooden one of these objects nicknamed the Spruce Goose was designed by Howard Hughes. Two siblings worked in a bicycle shop to build one of these objects that they operated in Kitty Hawk in 1903. For ten points, name these vehicles that were first piloted by the Wright Brothers.	ANSWER: air planes (acceptaircraft)
A scandal in this country involved the changing of Ewha University’s standards to allow for nepotism. A leader of this country allegedly drew upon a shadow cabal of advisers known as the “Eight Heavenly Fairies.” An investigation in this country revealed that many presidential speeches had been altered ahead of time by the shaman Choi Soon-Sil. For ten points, name this country whose president Park Geun-Hye was impeached in 2017 in the midst of mass protests in Seoul.	ANSWER: SouthKorea(or theRepublicofKorea; do not accept Democratic People’s Republic of Korea)
An ancient Egyptian version of this instrument was called the sheneb, and the salpinx was a version used by ancient Greek soldiers. Anton Weidinger played a keyed version of this instrument, and Jeremiah Clarke’sPrince of Denmark’s Marchis known as its “Voluntary.” This instrument has a cylindrical bore, unlike the cornet, and is twice as long as a related instrument used to play “Taps,” the bugle. For ten points, name this highest-pitched brass instrument in a standard orchestra.	ANSWER: trumpet
This  city  was  the  destination  of  retreating  troops  in  the  Bladensburg  Races.  Alexander  Hamilton convinced several delegates from this city to support his Assumption Bill by supporting the Residence Act, which provided for the purchase of lands near this city. Pierre L’Enfant designed a plan that established the layout of this city, which was burned by British forces during the War of 1812. For ten points, name this city where Dolley Madison saved paintings that were hung in the White House.	ANSWER: Washington, D.C. (or theDistrictofColumbia) Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
In  his  work  as  an  astrologer,  this  scientist  gained  notoriety  after  successfully  predicting  a  Turkish incursion and an extremely cold winter. In this scientist’sMysterium Cosmographicum, he proposed that the six known planets are organized in a system defined by Platonic solids. This assistant to Tycho Brahe [ty-kobra-hee] noted that Mars sweeps out equal areas in equal times and travels in an elliptical orbit. For ten points, name this German astronomer who discovered the three laws of planetary motion.	ANSWER: Johannes Kepler
One leader of this empire passed the Ecloga law code and ruled after the 20 Years Anarchy. A leader of  this  empire  won  the  Battle  of  Kleidion  and  married  his  sister  Anna  to  Vladimir  the  Great  of  Kiev. Tribonian composed a law code of this empire named for a leader who faced the Nika Riots. Basil II the Bulgar Slayer ruled this empire, which was founded by Constantine I. For ten points, name this empire, ruled by Justinian the Great from Constantinople, that fell in 1453.	ANSWER:ByzantineEmpire  (acceptEasternRomanEmpire;  do  not  prompt  on  Rome  or  Roman Empire alone)
In 1962, this Prime Minister’s country lost the Aksai Chin region to China after a brief border war. After this man’s mentor was assassinated, this man gave an impromptu speech in which he said “the light has  gone  out  of  our  lives.”  On  the  eve  of  his  nation’s  independence,  this  leader  described  his  people’s “tryst with destiny.” For ten points, name this prot ́eg ́e of Mahatma Gandhi and opponent of Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the first and longest-serving Prime Minister of India.	ANSWER: Jawaharlal Nehru
J.M.W.  Turner  showed  this  man  standing,  cross-armed,  in  front  of  a  soldier  in  the  paintingWar. Ingres[ahng] showed this man with symbols of Charlemagne and Caesar onhis Imperial Throne, while a painting by Orchardson shows this man on the shipBellerophonheading to his exile. Delaroche painted a realistic version of a scene where this man rides a donkey rather than a rearing horse across the Alps. For ten points, name this emperor of France.	ANSWER: Napol ́eonBonaparte(accept either; acceptNapol ́eonI)
Charles  Hamilton  Houston’s  work  for  this  organization  included  helping  to  establish  its  Legal Defense Fund. This organization, which started publishing the magazineThe Crisisin 1910, grew out of the  Niagara  Movement,  whose  members  were  forbidden  from  staying  at  segregated  hotels  in  New  York state. This organization spearheaded legal challenges to Jim Crow laws in the early 20th century. W.E.B. DuBois helped found, for ten points, what civil rights group?	ANSWER: NAACP(or theNationalAssociationfortheAdvancementofColoredPeople) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
A conservative newspaper in this city was run for years by Colonel Robert McCormick, whose slogan “World’s  Greatest  Newspaper”  was  applied  to  the  local  radio  station,  WGN.  A  paper  from  this  city published  the  erroneous  headline  “Dewey  Defeats  Truman”  during  the  election  of  1948.  According  to legend, Mrs. O’Leary’s cow knocking over a lantern caused a Great Fire in October 1871 in this city. For ten points, name this home of theTribune, the largest city in Illinois.	ANSWER: Chicago
This man suggested that his superior, Sir Thomas Fairfax, give up his strong position to encourage a hasty attack by Prince Rupert at the Battle of Naseby. In 1653, this Roundhead dismissed the Rump Parliament, the small group of MPs who remained after Pride’s Purge in 1648. Charles I was beheaded on orders of, for ten points, what leader of the New Model Army, known as “Old Ironsides,” who served as Lord Protector after the English Civil War?	ANSWER: Oliver Cromwell
Apartment buildings in this city were calledinsulae, and it contained a sewage system known as the Cloaca Maxima that drained into the Tiber River. This city was built on the Palatine, Capitoline, and five  other  hills.  For  ten  points,  name  this  ancient  city  whose  entertainment  venues  included  the  Circus Maximus and the Colosseum, the capital of a vast Italian empire.	ANSWER: ancient Rome
This  work  notes  that  the  speaker’s  surroundings  have  been  “consecrated  [...]  far  above  our  poor power to add.” This oration was preceded by a two-hour speech by Edward Everett, and it notes that a “government of the people, by the people, and for the people, will not perish from this earth.” Casualties at  a  Pennsylvania  battlefield  were  honored  with,  for  ten  points,  what  speech  by  Abraham  Lincoln  that opens with the phrase “Four score and seven years ago?”	ANSWER: GettysburgAddress
This city was sacked two years after the surrender of Alamut fortress by the Assassins. This city was ruled by al-Musta’sim, until he was legendarily killed by being wrapped in a rug and trampled by horses, thereby preventing the shedding of royal blood. In 1258, Hulagu Khan made the Tigris River “run black with ink” after his Mongols sacked, for ten points, what capital of the Abbasid Empire that now serves as the capital of modern Iraq?	ANSWER: Baghdad Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
An  oratorio  by  this  composer  with  a  libretto  based  on  Genesis  andParadise Lostopens  with  a “Representation of Chaos.” This composer ofThe Creationwrote a hymn to Francis II of Austria that is now the national anthem of Germany. The orchestra gradually leaves the stage at the end of a work this man wrote to convince his patron Prince Esterhazy to give his musicians a vacation. For ten points, name this “father of the symphony” and composer of theFarewellSymphony.	ANSWER: Franz Joseph Haydn
This city’s Pioneer Park, on top of Telegraph Hill, contains a tower built in memory of Lillie Hitchcock Coit. Its Russian Hill neighborhood is known for a one-block stretch of Lombard Street with eight hairpin turns. This city’s Castro neighborhood was the launching pad for the political career of Harvey Milk. The Haight-Ashbury district nurtured the “hippie” counterculture in, for ten points, what “city by the bay” in Northern California?	ANSWER:SanFrancisco
Conspiracy theories about this organization have emerged after the shooting death of Seth Rich in Bloomingdale. Donna Brazile became the interim leader of this organization after the resignation of Debbie Wasserman-Schulz. Russia may have orchestrated a July 2016 e-mail leak showing this organization’s bias against  one  of  its  members,  Bernie  Sanders.  For  ten  points,  name  this  governing  body  of  the  political party that includes Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama.	ANSWER: DemocraticNationalCommittee
The  Ledberg  Stone  probably  depicts  a  wolf  devouring  a  legless  man,  believed  to  be  a  scene  from this event. A stone found at Jurby on the Isle of Man might depict the beginning of this event, in which a  deity  blows  the  Gjallarhorn.  Fimbulwinter  precedes  this  event,  according  to  the  Prose  Edda.  Lif  and Lifthrasir are the two humans who survive this event, in which Odin and Thor die. For ten points, name this apocalypse of Norse myth.	ANSWER: Ragnarok(acceptFimbulwinterbefore mentioned)
This man’s criticism of the Vietnam War led Lyndon Johnson to accuse him of playing “too much football without a helmet.” Though this man signed the Helsinki Accords, he asserted that “there is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe” during a debate with Jimmy Carter, hampering his re-election bid. For ten points, name this president who succeeded, and controversially pardoned, Richard Nixon.	ANSWER: Gerald RudolphFord(or Leslie LynchKing) Page 2  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
This deity wore an Atef crown decorated with ostrich feathers, and was fused with Apis to become Serapis in the Hellenic period.  This “foremost westerner’s” spine was represented by djed pillars after he was found in a lead-sealed box at Byblos by his wife, who retrieved this god’s body after he was tricked by his brother, Set.  For ten points, name this husband of Isis and father of Horus, the Egyptian god of the dead.	ANSWER: Osiris(orAsir)
This leader thanked “the grace of Ahura Mazda” on the Behistun inscription.  He ordered his lands into 20 satrapies, and this son of Cambyses II[cam-BYE-sees] built the Apadana at the ceremonial city of Persepolis.  The Ionian Revolt targeted this ruler; in revenge, he launched an invasion that was stymied in 490 BC. For ten points, name this Persian emperor whose army was turned back at Marathon.	ANSWER: DariusIorDariustheGreat
With David Scott, this man docked with an Agena vehicle, makingGemini 8the first docking of two orbiting spacecraft.  This man, a retired U.S. Navy pilot upon becoming an astronaut, died in 2012.  As the Command ModuleColumbiawas piloted by Michael Collins, this man flew with Buzz Aldrin and took “one small step for a man”.  For ten points, name this commander of theApollo 11mission, the first man to walk on the Moon.	ANSWER: NeilArmstrong
This  author  created  analogies  of  the  divided  line  and  the  Sun  in  a  work  featuring  his  brothers, Adeimantus and Glaucon.  This man, who was briefly sold into slavery on Syracuse, developed a theory of eternal forms and compared the city to the soul in a work that advocated rule by philosopher-kings.  For ten points, name this Greek philosopher who recorded his teacher, Socrates, in dialogues likeThe Apology and wroteThe Republic.	ANSWER: Plato
Thomas Henry Burge and Lord Frederick Cavendish were murdered in Phoenix Park in this city, and this city  is home to  a war memorial  known as the Garden  of Remembrance  located  on Parnell Square. It served as the capital of a free state until a 1937 constitution.  The assassinations of the Cairo gang, a group of British intelligence officers, by the IRA sparked Bloody Sunday in this city.  For ten points, name this capital of Ireland.	ANSWER: Dublin Page 1  NHBB B-Set Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 1
One of these compositions uses words by August Hoffmann and includes a second movement dedicated to wine, women, and song.  One of these pieces shares a melody with The Moldau movement of Smetana’s Ma  Vlast.  Another of these pieces uses the melody “To Anacreon in Heaven” as the setting for a poem commemorating Fort McHenry’s bombardment in the War of 1812 written by Francis Scott Key.  For ten points, the Hatikvah, “Deutchlandlied” and “The Star-Spangled Banner” are all what type of song, which is used to represent its country?	ANSWER: nationalanthems
The Dutch built Fort Provintia on this island; today, Chihkan Tower stands at the former fort in the city of Tainan, which was this island’s capital during the Qing[CHING] dynasty.  This island, once known as Formosa, was the destination of Chiang Kai-shek’s retreating Kuomintang.  For ten points, name this island off the southeast coast of China, which disputes its sovereignty.	ANSWER:Taiwan(orRepublicofChinaorZhonghuaMinguo; acceptFormosabefore mentioned; do not accept or prompt China alone, Zhonghua alone, or the People’s Republic of China)
Amos Akerman and Benjamin Bristow were appointed by this President as part of the Department of Justice, which this man created.  This man put down the 1874 Brooks-Baxter War between two factions of the Republican Party.  The Force Acts were passed by this President to safeguard African-Americans’ right to vote, and the end of his term marked the end of the Reconstruction Era.  For ten points, name this U.S. President, a former general nicknamed “Unconditional Surrender” for his role in the U.S. Civil War.	ANSWER: Ulysses S. Grant
The election of Stephen Langton to one post led to the signing of this document, which was supported by the Charter of the Forest.  One clause from this document formed a council of 25 nobles to ensure its enforcement while another dealt with the removal of fish weirs.  This document was proposed after a ruler lost the Battle of Bouvines and signed at Runnymede.  For ten points, name this 1215 document signed by King John of England which granted rights to barons.	ANSWER: MagnaCarta
The last U.S. battleship to be completed was named for this state and christened by Margaret, the daughter  of  a  then-Senator  from  this  state.   That  battleship,  now  a  museum  next  to  theUSS  Arizona memorial, sailed to Tokyo for the signing of the Japanese surrender ending World War II. For ten points, name this U.S. state where Harry Truman lived in Independence, just outside Kansas City.	ANSWER: Missouri(acceptUSSMissouri)
This  man  appointed  Michigan  senator  Zachariah  Chandler  to  Secretary  of  the Interior in  order  to  fight  corruption  within  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Affairs.  This  man’s Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Benjamin  Bristow,  cracked  down  on  a scandal  during  this president’s tenure that culminated in the indictment of John McDonald and this president’s private   secretary,   Orville   Babcock.   The   Whiskey   Ring   scandal   occurred   during   the presidency  of,  for  ten  points,  what  U.S.  president  and  Civil  War  general  who  succeeded Andrew Johnson?	ANSWER: Ulysses S. Grant (or Hiram Ulysses Grant)
In  1791,  the  HMS Pandora broke  on  this  geographical  feature,  killing  35  sailors. Discovered  in  1768  by  French  explorer  Louis  de  Bougainville,  this  geographic  feature  was the site of a major shipwreck for the HMS Endeavour, captained by James Cook, which was only able to break away due to a high tide. In 2018, the National Geographic said half of this place was dead, “Akin to a forest after a devastating fire.” For thousands  of  years,  Torres Islanders and Aboriginal peoples have been using, for ten points, what coral system off the coast of Queensland, Australia?	ANSWER: Great Barrier Reef
A  composer  from  this  musical  era,  Heinrich  Biber  [[BEE-buh]],  called  for  strings  to play col legno to  evoke  the  sounds  of  battle  in  the  opening  of Battalia.  Another  composer from  this  era,  who  wrote  the  music  for The Bourgeois Gentleman,  died  by  stabbing  himself with  a  conducting  staff.  The  all-female  ensemble  of  the  Ospedale  Della  Pieta  orphanage often  sang  music  by  a  composer  from  this  era  who  wrote  four concerti  grossi depicting changing weather throughout the year. For ten points, name this classical music era of Jean- Baptiste Lully, Antonio Vivaldi, and Johann Sebastian Bach.	ANSWER: Baroque era
Following  the  Bolshevik  Revolution,  an  alternative  version  of  this  character  was banned for being too “bourgeois,” with Joseph Stalin instead uplifting the Slavic "Ded Moroz." Jerry Rubin mocked the House Un-American Activities Committee by holding a toy rifle  while  dressed  as  this  character.  Thomas  Nast  depicted  this  character  draped  with  the American  flag  and  holding  a  puppet  that  resembled  Jefferson  Davis.  For  ten  points,  what character,  based  on  a  historical  saint,  is  known  for giving  presents  to  children  during Christmas?	ANSWER: Santa Claus (or Kris Kringle; accept Saint Nicholas; accept Father Christmas before “Christmas” is mentioned; accept Ded Moroz before mentioned; accept regional equivalents for “Santa Claus”)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 2
This author posited that "Whatever is my right as a man is also the right of another" in a response to Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France, after which he was put  on  trial  in  absentia.  This  author  described  "the  summer  soldier  and  the  sunshine patriot"  who  shrink  from  "the  times  that  try  men's  souls"  in The  American  Crisis.  Before penning Rights  of  Man,  this  author  asserted  that  the  Colonies  had  plenty  of  resources  to defeat  Great  Britain.  For  ten  points,  name  this  author  who  advocated  for  a  "republican government" in Common Sense.	ANSWER: Thomas Paine
A  man  in  this  profession,  Dua-Kheti,  may  have  written  the  work The Satires of the Trades which  extolled  the  virtues  of  this  occupation.  A  female  recluse  named  Diemut  who held  this  occupation is  considered  a  local  saint  in  her  home  region  of  Austria  for  single- handedly  stocking  the  Wessobrunn  [[VEH-soh-broohn]]  Monastery  library.  This  type  of public servant developed the demotic Egyptian script for everyday use. Papyrus scrolls were used  by,  for  ten  points,  which  type  of  professional  copyist  who  became  obsolete  after  the invention of the printing press?	ANSWER: Scribes (accept Calligraphers; accept Copyist before mentioned; prompt on "Writer" or equivalents)
NASA’s future missions include launching  the Dragonfly spacecraft  to  a  feature  of this celestial body to investigate its possible habitability. One of this planet’s moons was determined  to  be  habitable  after  the Cassini space  probe  found  evidence  of  geysers.  An anagram  that  describes  a  feature of this planet as a “thin, flat ring” was published by Christian  Huygens  [[HOY-gehns]]  in  1655.  In  1610,  Galileo  Galilei  observed  the  extensive ring system of, for ten points, what gas giant, the second largest planet in the solar system?	ANSWER: Saturn
This ruler formally ended imperial funding for the Neoplatonic Academy, which had been  revived  by  Emperor  Theodosius  the  Younger.  In  the  text The  Buildings,  Procopius falsely attributes the construction of walls in Edessa and Tomis to this patron of his rather than to this man's uncle and predecessor of a similar name. The unpopularity of taxes raised by  this  monarch  and  his  advisor,  John  the  Cappadocian,  led  to  the  Nika  [[NEE-kah]]  Riots. The Corpus  Juris  Civilis was  compiled  by,  for  ten  points,  what  sixth  century  Byzantine emperor who married Theodora?	ANSWER: Justinian the Great (accept Justinian I; do not accept or prompt on "Justin")  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 2
To   denounce   the   atrocities   committed   in   this   present-day   country's   war   of independence,  Archer  Blood wrote  a  namesake  telegram  to  the  U.S.  State  Department. George Harrison and Ravi Shankar organized a benefit concert at Madison Square Garden in support  of  refugees  in  this  country,  which  in  2013  witnessed  the  death  of  over  eleven hundred people in the world's deadliest garment factory disaster. For ten points, name this densely populated country in South Asia which broke away from Pakistan in 1971.	ANSWER: Bangladesh (or People's Republic of Bangladesh; or Gônoprojatontrī Bangladesh)
During   this   war, future   Stasi   head   Erich   Mielke   [[MEEL-kuh]]   was   a   major participant in the killing of about 7000 priests during a "red terror." During this war, Emilio Mola Vidal may have coined the term "fifth column" to refer to hidden supporters within a target  territory.  The  Abraham  Lincoln  Brigades  were  composed  of  American  volunteers who fought for the Republican side in this war, during which the Falangists allowed the Nazi Condor  Legion  to  bomb  Guernica.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1930s  war  which  ended  with Francisco Franco establishing a fascist regime.	ANSWER: Spanish Civil War (or Guerra Civil Española)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 2
In this decade, Irving Ives was defeated in a gubernatorial race by W. Averell Harriman, who later lost a Democratic nomination in this decade to a man who campaigned on the “New Politics” platform. Both presidential elections during this decade resulted in the victor using a West Point Bible during his inauguration which followed losing campaigns by a Democratic governor of Illinois. For ten points, name this decade in which Adlai Stevenson was twice defeated for president by Dwight Eisenhower.	ANSWER:1950s
A character in this film creates a jingle to the tune of “Dokdo is our land,” a patriotic song about the disputed Liancourt Rocks to remember that she is an only child from Chicago. In this film, a woman asks for tables to be arranged in a “crane’s wing” formation to emulate Admiral Yi at the Battle of Hansan Island. This film is the first fully non-English film to win a Best Picture Oscar. For ten points, name this 2019 Korean film by Bong Joon-ho about a poor family that infiltrates a rich household.	ANSWER:Parasite
Gabriel  Nicolas  de  la  Reynie  is  generally  considered  the  founder  of  these  modern  organizations that  take  their  name  from  the  Greek  for  “citizenship.”  One  of  these  organizations  replaced  London’s watchmen. That organization was created by Sir Robert Peel, and its members were known as Bobbies. Under Napoleon, vagabonds and deserters were among those surveilled by, for ten points, what type of organization, empowered to enforce the law and capture criminals?	ANSWER:Police
The longest-serving holder of this position gained the nickname “King Dick.” Another holder of this position  named  John  Hall  proposed  that  one  Chinese  immigrant  could  enter  the  country  for  every  10 pounds of cargo. While holding this position, David Lange made his country a nuclear-free zone. The first successful Anglophone effort for women’s suffrage occurred while Richard Seddon held this position. For ten points, name this office held by Helen Clark and Jacinda Ardern.	ANSWER:Prime MinisterofNew Zealand(acceptPMofNew Zealand)
When  this  city  was  attacked,  John  Rabe  created  a  safety  zone  to  protect  civilians  from  invading soldiers. This city was the capital of Wang Jingwei’s puppet government. This city was the first capital of the Ming Dynasty, and it also served in that role for the Taiping Kingdom and the Kuomintang. This city names the first “unequal treaty” which ended the First Opium War. For ten points, name this city where a namesake “Rape” occurred during the Second Sino-Japanese War.	ANSWER:Nanjing(acceptNanking) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
This man spelled out the word “hetacomb” in a speech that began, “What we’re going to try to do, is we’re going to try to rap and educate.” Howard Alk directed a documentary about this man’s murder. This  man  coined  the  phrase  “rainbow  coalition”  in  1969.  Along  with  Mark  Clark,  this  man  was  killed in  his  sleep  during  a  Chicago  Police  Department  raid.  The  Weather  Underground  declared  war  on  the government after the death of, for ten points, what Black Panther leader from Illinois?	ANSWER: Fred(rick)Hampton
The  person  named  to  this  position  in  2014  authored  the  book  Hit  Refresh.  Another  holder  of  this position cited high costs when he said of their competitor, “There’s no chance that the iPhone is going to  get  any  significant  market  share.”  Steve  Ballmer  held  this  position  from  2000  to  2014,  succeeding  a Harvard dropout who, with Warren Buffett, founded The Giving Pledge. For ten points, Bill Gates held what leadership position at a company that created the Windows operating system?	ANSWER:ChiefExecutiveOfficer ofMicrosoft(prompt on answers such as “Head of Microsoft”, do not accept or prompt on “president of Microsoft”)
A  man  with  this  profession  was  venerated  by  the  Rosicrucians  for  his  allegedly  prophetic “prognostications.” That member of this profession may have been calling himself superior to a Roman practitioner  when  he  named  himself  “Paracelsus.”  Henry  II  of  France  was  served  by  a  member  of  this profession  named  Ambrose  Pare,  the  first  to  describe  phantom  limb  pain.  For  ten  points,  name  this profession whose medieval practitioners followed Galen’s theory of the four humors.	ANSWER:Doctor(s) (accept any answer indicating the medical profession)
This  book  claims  that  before  coinage,  people  risked  “the  grossest  frauds  and  impositions”  if  they failed to carefully consider purchases. Many of this book’s ideas originated in its author’s earlier Theory of Moral Sentiments. This book used the example of a pin factory to illustrate the division of labor and posited the existence of an invisible hand. For ten points, name this book of laissez-faire economics written by Adam Smith.	ANSWER: An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of theWealth of Nations
This  man  vetoed  the  Bland-Allison  Act  in  order  to  preserve  the  gold  standard.  This  man  sent Federal troops to guard railway installations, breaking the Great Railroad Strike. Although he supported black male suffrage, this man was forced to withdraw federal troops from the South in order to become president following a disputed election against Samuel Tilden. For ten points, name this Republican from Ohio who became president as a result of the Compromise of 1877.	ANSWER: Rutherford B(irchard)Hayes Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 1
An independence movement in this modern-day country started when Carlos Cespedes freed all his slaves and proclaimed the October 10th Manifesto. This country’s anthem”La Bayamesa”was composed during  the  Ten  Years  War.  Valeriano  Weyler  was  called  “the  Butcher”  after  his  brutal  suppression  of rebels in this modern-day country. Jos ́e Mart ́ı was killed fighting for independence from Spain for, for ten points, what Caribbean island nation with its capital at Havana?	ANSWER: Republic of Cuba
This leader established a national inquiry into the status of MMIW in his country. This prime minister, who  ran  on  the  slogan  “Real  Change,”  has  been  accused  by  Jody  Wilson-Raybould  of  obstruction  of justice. This man expelled Jane Philpott from his party in 2019 over the SNC-Lavalin scandal. This man responded “because it’s 2015” when asked why gender parity was important to his cabinet. For 10 points, name this current Prime Minister of Canada.	ANSWER: JustinTrudeau(prompt on “Trudeau”)
A series of lawsuits brought by this man’s heirs were known as his namesakepleitos. This man was granted royal titles and a tenth of the riches he discovered in theCapitulations of Santa Fe. This man’s expedition was chronicled inThe Life of the Admiral. The Bay of Arrows was named by this man after he was attacked by the Ciguayos people in the first of his voyages to Hispaniola. Ferdinand and Isabella commissioned  the  voyages  of,  for  ten  points,  what  navigator  who  is  often  credited  with  “discovering” America?	ANSWER: Christopher Columbus
After Offa of Mercia offered a marriage between this man’s daughter Bertha and Ecgfrith, this man banned English ships from his ports. This man’s brother Carloman allied against him with the Lombard King Desiderius. Lupo II of Gascony may have helped ambush his men at the Roncevaux Pass, in which his chronicler Einhard noted every soldier was killed. This man’s sons divided his empire after he died in the Treaty of Verdun. The son of Pepin the Short, for ten points, name this first Holy Roman Emperor.	ANSWER: Charlemagne(OrCharlesthe Great, orCarolusMagnus)
The book The Destiny of The Mother Church is controversial in this sect for comparing this sect’s founder  to  Jesus  Christ.  Mark  Twain  wrote  a  book  about  this  sect  in  which  he  breaks  102  bones  and isn’t treated. Members of this sect believe that they can be cursed by “malicious animal magnetism” and collect  books  in  their  “reading  rooms.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  sect,  founded  by  Mary  Baker  Eddy, which publishes a namesake “Monitor” and believes sickness is an illusion curable by prayer.	ANSWER: ChristianScience Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
One  leader  from  this  family  was  targeted  by  the  Yanan  Faction  in  the  “Second  Arduous  March.” Another  member  of  this  family  was  suspected  of  ordering  the  1983  Rangoon  bombing  as  part  of  his songun, or military-first, policy. Economic reforms under a leader from this family included the opening of the Kaesong Industrial Park, a reversal of his predecessor’sjucheideology. For ten points, name this family which has ruled North Korea since its founding, whose members included Il-Sung and Jong-il.	ANSWER: Kimfamily (acceptKimIl-Sung andKimJong-il)
The SSNIP test checks for violations of this type of legislation. “Tying” claims are often made citing this type of legislation. The case ofFlood v. Kuhnupheld the exception granted to Major League Baseball from this type of legislation. TheE.C. Knightruling weakened a law of this type that had been passed in 1890. For ten points, name this type of law that guarantees fair competition as a benefit to consumers, two of which are named for Clayton and Sherman.	ANSWER:antitrustacts
This man controversially placed bishop Aloysius Stepinac under house arrest where he died. This man secured  power  after  executing  Draza  Mihailovic,  the  leader  of  the  Chetnik  Movement,  for  collaborating with the Ustase [oo-sta-shuh]. During the Informbiro period, this man’s disagreements with Joseph Stalin led  his  country  to  be  expelled  from  Cominform.  The  Non-Aligned  Movement  was  co-founded  by  this Partisan leader. For ten points, identify this marshal who led communist Yugoslavia.	ANSWER: Josip BrozTito
James  P.  Coleman  established  this  state’s  “Sovereignty  Commission”  which  was  meant  to  support racial segregation. A professor from this state, Clennon Washington King Jr., was labeled the “Black Don Quixote” and was the first African-American to run for President. The murder of three CORE activists in this state’s Neshoba county prompted a federal investigation labeled “this state” Burning. Ross Barnett opposed  the  Freedom  Summer  movement  in  this  state  which  sought  to  register  African-Americans  to vote. For ten points, name this Southern state whose flagship “Ole” university was integrated by James Meredith.	ANSWER: Mississippi
This  artist  adopted  the  Precisionist  style  to  paint  a  series  of  skyscrapers,  including  “Radiator Building – Night.” In 1939, this artist begrudgingly painted a pineapple after Dole funded a trip to Hawaii to see one. This artist created paintings titled “White Place” and “Black Place” during a stay in Taos, New Mexico, and appears in the photos of her husband, Alfred Stieglitz. For 10 points, name this artist, famous for her paintings of flowers and cow skulls.	ANSWER: Georgia O’Keeffe Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 1
This politician wrote theMy Daycolumn to advocate for civil rights and helped create a planned community  in  Arthurdale  to  provide  homes  for  disenfranchised  miners.  This  probable  lover  of  Lorena Hickok employed social secretary Lucy Mercer, who indirectly inspired this woman to broaden her social life by having an affair with her husband. The UN Commission on Human Rights was chaired by, for ten points, what American social reformer, the wife of the 32nd President?	ANSWER: (Anna) EleanorRoosevelt
Jean  Calas  was  accused  of  murdering  his  son  to  prevent  him  from  performing  this  action  and  was defended  by  Voltaire  in  hisTreatise on Toleration.  Gabrielle  d’Estr ́ees  supported  a  royal  performance of  this  action  in  1593.  Spanish  Moors  who  performed  this  action  were  calledmoriscos.  For  ten  points, name this action that was performed by Henry IV upon winning the French Wars of Religion, supposedly declaring “Paris is well worth a Mass.”	ANSWER: convertingtoCatholicism(accept  word  forms  and  equivalents;  prompt  on  “converting religions” and similar; only prompt on “converting to Christianity” after “Moors” has been read)
During  this  conflict,  a  leader’s  plans  were  almost  derailed  by  a  charge  led  by  Baldwin  de  Carron and  Garnier  de  Nablus.  Forces  captured  the  Sultanate  of  Rum’s  capital  during  this  conflict’s  Battle  of Iconium. Prior to this campaign, Guy of Lusignan was captured at the Battle of Hattin. After the Battle of Arsuf in this crusade, an invasion failed to take Jerusalem. Christians were allowed access to holy places in Jerusalem as a result of, for ten points, what crusade against Saladin led by Richard the Lionheart?	ANSWER: ThirdCrusade(”Crusade” not needed after mentioned)
This  city  was  the  headquarters  of  Ryan  Airlines,  who  constructedThe Spirit of St. Louisfor Charles  Lindbergh.  In  2016,  a  twenty-five  year  legal  fight  was  resolved  regarding  the  placing  of  a  cross on government land at this city’s Mount Soledad. This city’s Point Loma serves as a naval base for the Pacific Fleet, and its Balboa Park contains a zoo that pioneered open-air exhibits. For ten points, name this California city whose San Ysidro district is home to a large border crossing to Tijuana, Mexico.	ANSWER: SanDiego
In  the  Missouri  River,  Bloody  Island  gained  its  nickname  for  being  the  location  of  many  of  these events. James Shields and Abraham Lincoln almost participated in one of these events, another of which involved future president Andrew Jackson and led to the death of Charles Dickinson. Weehawken, New Jersey hosted several of these events, including one that killed a former Secretary of the Treasury in 1804. For ten points, name this type of incident in which Aaron Burr shot and killed Alexander Hamilton.	ANSWER: duels Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
This  politician  attracted  controversy  and  massive  protests  for  his  murder  of  the  activist  Hugo Spadafora  and  his  alleged  role  in  the  death  of  his  predecessor,  Omar  Torrijos.  After  this  man  claimed sanctuary in a Catholic church, Navy SEALs blasted rock music outside the compound for three days of psychological warfare. Operation Just Cause targeted this man’s country, despited his previous service as a CIA ally in the War on Drugs. For ten points, name this former leader of Panama who was deposed in 1989.	ANSWER: Manuel Antonio NoriegaMoreno
Sofonisba  Anguissola  painted  a  young  girl  raising  her  left  arm  while  playing  this  game  with  her sisters. Several versions of theShahnamaillustrate the story of Burzhmir’s introduction of this game to Iran from India. A set of equipment for playing this game thought to be made in Trondheim was found in 1831 in the Hebrides on the island of Lewis; that set of ivory figurines uses red and white, rather than the traditional black and white. For ten points, name this game played with rooks, bishops and queens.	ANSWER: chess
This  woman  gained  power  after  a  monarch  attempted  to  bypass  the  Third  Succession  Act.  This great-grandaughter  of  Henry  VII  was  implicated  in  Wyatt’s  Rebellion,  despite  only  her  father  actually taking part in it. This woman awaited coronation for a year in the Tower of London, but her followers quickly abandoned her in support of Mary I, who had her executed shortly after being crowned. For ten points, name this woman who was Queen of England for nine days.	ANSWER: Lady Jane Grey(accept Lady JaneDudley; prompt on Jane)
This  election  year  involved  the  first  instance  of  a  man  in  a  chicken  suit  harassing  a  candidate; that  instance  occurred  outside  the  Detroit  Economic  Club  after  that  incumbent  refused  to  debate  his opponents. During this election, James Carville helped associate one candidate with the phrase “It’s the economy,  stupid.”  During  this  election,  a  third-party  candidate  claimed  a  “giant  sucking  sound”  would result from NAFTA. For ten points, name this election year in which Ross Perot and incumbent George H. W. Bush lost to Bill Clinton.	ANSWER: U.S. Presidential Election of 1992
During a voyage from Madagascar, the pirate John Thurber gave Henry Woodward this crop, which Woodward  turned  into  a  major  crop  in  North  America.  The  Engelberg  Huller  and  Winnowing  Barns processed this crop. Thomas Jefferson investigated why an Italian variety of this crop was more expensive than the “Carolina Gold” variety, which was grown near the Ashley and Combahee Rivers in tidal zones. The Banaue [ban-ow-ay] terraces in the Philippines were created to grow, for ten points, what food crop?	ANSWER:rice Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 1
This initiative was made possible when one army was given the “Halt Order” and told to withdraw to the Canal Line at Lys. May 26 was declared a national day of prayer out of George VI’s desperation to see this initiative succeed. This initiative, codenamed Operation Dynamo, involved the use of fishing boats and civilian ships, and its end prompted Winston Churchill to give the “We shall fight on the beaches” speech. For ten points, name this “miracle” in which Allied forces were delivered from a namesake French beach in 1940.	ANSWER: evacuation from Dunkirk(Dunkirkis all that is needed; accept OperationDynamobefore mentioned; prompt on descriptive answers related to evacuating France in 1940, escaping the Nazis,
During  an  October  1967  protest  at  this  facility,  George  Harris  placed  carnations  in  the  barrels  of soldiers’  guns.  In  2010,  Jeffrey  Amos  was  one  of  two  policeman  shot  by  John  Patrick  Bedell  at  this facility’s underground Metro station. The Phoenix Project helped repair this facility after Hani Hanjour and four others hijacked American Airlines Flight 77 and crashed it into this facility. For ten points, name this Arlington County, Virginia facility that houses the Department of Defense?	ANSWER: the Pentagon
During this event, one perpetrator was caught on camera wearing a shirt that said “LOL.” The victim of this event had, in 2001, fallen out with his family after using a fake passport to try to visit Disneyland Tokyo. The perpetrators of this event sprayed the nerve agent VX in the victim’s face, having been told they were filming a scene for a prank TV show. For ten points, name this February 2017 incident at an airport in Kuala Lumpur that led to tensions between Malaysia and North Korea.	ANSWER: the assassination(ormurder,death, etc.) ofKimJong-Nam(prompt on partial answers; prompt  on  descriptions  of  “the  assassination  of  Kim  Jong-Un’s  (half)-brother”  or  “the  assassination  of Kim Jong-il’s son”)
This man espoused his hate for Catholics in the bookForeign Conspiracy Against the Liberties of the United States. Chemistry professor Leonard Gale helped this man perfect his most famous invention, which was boosted by Maine congressman Francis O.J. Smith’s funding for a 38-mile-long structure from Washington D.C. to Baltimore that transmitted the words “What hath God wrought” in 1844. For ten points, name this American inventor of the single-wire telegraph system.	ANSWER: Samuel Finley Breese Morse
This man’s troops killed tens of thousands of Greeks by burning down Smyrna while attempting to restore lost territories during the Chanak Crisis. This man’s government rejected the Treaty of Sevres in favor of the 1923 Treaty of Lausanne. He promoted the Six Arrows ideology, which created a new modern alphabet based on Latin and banned the wearing of the fez in an attempt to westernise his newly formed republic. For ten points, name this founder of modern Turkey.	ANSWER: Mustafa KemalAtaturk(accept either or both underlined names) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
A life size nude depicting a female Greek one of these people holds a small cross in a marble sculpture by  Hiram  Powers.  Juan  de  Pareja  was  one  of  these  people  who  himself  became  an  artist  after  he  was painted by Diego Velazquez. Two sculptures, later identified as these people rather than prisoners, were intended to flank a horned sculpture of Moses for the tomb of Pope Julius II. For ten points, name this type of person who Michelangelo showed bound to rocks as part of their forced labor.	ANSWER: slaves
This  leader’s  advance  was  so  quick  that  his  enemies,  who  had  landed  in  Massilia,  were  forced  to turn around after reaching the Rhone. This leader was opposed by a strategy of delay implemented by the dictator Fabius. This general, who lost to Scipio Africanus at the Battle of Zama, collected the rings of senators slain at the Battle of Cannae and marched elephants across the Alps. Rome nearly lost the Second Punic War to, for ten points, what Carthaginian general?	ANSWER:HannibalBarca
TheRetaliationwas the only ship captured by one side in this war, while the other side captured theVengeanceandInsurgent. This conflict was ended with the Treaty of Mortefontaine and triggered by Minister Talleyrand’s demand of a bribe during the XYZ Affair. George Washington was re-commissioned into  the  Army  in  preparation  for,  for  ten  points,  what  undeclared  naval  war  between  France  and  the United States during the Adams Administration?	ANSWER: Quasi-War
This  leader  was  able  to  outmaneuver  a  group  of  eight  regents  led  by  Sushun  to  seize  power  and empowered the Grand Council to make most decisions. In 1898, this leader carried out a coup that ended the Hundred Days’ Reform. This leader agreed to the Self-Strengthening Movement proposed by Prince Gong,  but  later  caused  an  invasion  by  an  alliance  of  Western  powers  due  to  her  support  for  the  Boxer Rebellion. For ten points, name this anti-Westernizing Empress Dowager during the late Qing Dynasty.	ANSWER: Empress Dowager Cixi[see-shee] (orCixiTaihou)
This character’s implicit offer of marriage is declined by a man who states that he, like his prized rooks, can only fall in love once in his lifetime. The actress who plays Clara Oswald onDoctor Whoalso plays this character, who is remorseful after spreading rumors about the illegitimate pregnancy of Flora Hastings  only  to  discover  she  has  stomach  cancer  instead.  After  ascending  to  the  throne,  this  woman distances herself from her mother, the Duchess of Kent, and she elects to marry the Saxon Prince Albert. Jenna Coleman portrays, for ten points, which British monarch who ruled for most of the 19th century?	ANSWER: Victoria(acceptAlexandrinaVictoria) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 1
Elizabeth Tyler owned and operated a newspaper for this organization calledThe Searchlight, which ran articles written by Edward Young Clarke. The first national meeting of this group took place in 1867 at  the  Maxwell  House  Hotel  in  Nashville.  This  group  was  targeted  in  an  1871  Enforcement  Act,  and Nathan Bedford Forrest served as this group’s first Grand Wizard. For ten points, name this cross-burning white supremacist group.	ANSWER: KuKluxKlan(orKKK)
One of this man’s daughters helped build fortresses in Stafford, Warwick, and Chester, earning her the nickname “the Lady of the Mercians.” After this father of Aethlflaed and Edward the Elder won at Chippenham  and  Edington,  he  converted  Guthrum  to  Christianity,  baptizing  Guthrum  as  his  spiritual son. The Bishop Asser chronicled the life of, for ten points, what king of Wessex who ruled from 871 to 899 who, like Canute, was styled “the Great?”	ANSWER: Alfredthe Great
One employee of this company, Gerhard Domagk, won a Nobel Prize but was arrested by the Nazis for contemplating accepting it. This company appointed Fritz ter Meer as its chair shortly after he finished his  prison  term  for  Nazi  war  crimes.  Felix  Hoffmann’s  work  with  this  company  included  an  acetylation of morphine, creating a compound that this company trademarked as heroin. For ten points, name this German pharmaceutical company whose chemists synthesized acetylsalicylic acid, or aspirin.	ANSWER: BayerAG
Adi Dassler convinced this “Buckeye Bullet” to wear his Schuhfabriks, marking the first sponsorship of African-American male athletes. Leni Riefenstahl’s filmOlympiarecords one of this man’s victories. A snubbed handshake between this man and a world leader was lauded as a strike against Aryan supremacy, but this man was also snubbed by FDR when he returned home. For ten points, name this athlete who won four track and field gold medals at the 1936 Berlin Olympics.	ANSWER: Jesse Owens
To produce this good, a heating source called an arch is used. A precursor to this good called gorosoe is produced in towns like Hadong in South Korea. In 2012, Teriak Caron and Inouk Caron were arrested in  conjunction  with  the  heist  of  over  6  million  pounds  of  this  good  from  a  warehouse  in  Quebec.  Late winter marks sugaring season, which is the best time to harvest this good’s precursor through tapping. For ten points, name this sweet foodstuff whose American production has traditionally been dominated by Vermont maple forests.	ANSWER: maplesyrup(prompt on syrup alone before “maple” is read) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 1
During this man’s presidency, a protest against a tax on dwelling-houses was led by the auctioneer John Fries. This first U.S. ambassador to Holland wrote about checks and balances in hisThoughts  on Government. The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions were written in opposition to this President’s set of anti-immigration laws, the Alien and Sedition Acts, whose unpopularity led this man to lose his re-election bid to Thomas Jefferson. For ten points, name this founding father and second U.S. President.	ANSWER: JohnAdams(prompt on Adams; do not accept or prompt on John Quincy Adams)
This  composer  wrote  a  piece  inspired  by  Theodore  Roosevelt’s  speech  “The  Strenuous  Life,”  and dramatized  Rooosevelt’s  meeting  with  Booker  T.  Washington  in  his  lost  operaA  Guest  of  Honor.  The title character refuses to buy a “bag of luck” in his operaTreemonisha. He was known as the “king” of an early  20th  century  form  characterized  by  2/4  time  and  syncopated  melodies.  For  ten  points,  name  this African-American composer who wrote “The Entertainer” and the “Maple Leaf Rag.”	ANSWER: ScottJoplin
One side in these events found that their style of calling individual challenges was ineffective. The Battle of Bunei opened the first of these events, during which King Chungyeol of Goryeo provided counsel and  soldiers  to  one  side.  The  second  of  these  events  was  prompted  by  the  beheadings  of  two  handfuls of  emissaries  at  Hakata.  One  side’s  refusal  to  allow  ships  to  land  at  Kyushu  may  have  prompted  these events, which were twice foiled by the “divine wind.” For ten points, name these failed invasions by Kublai Khan’s Yuan dynasty.	ANSWER: MongolinvasionsofJapan(accept descriptions of theMongolsattackingJapan; accept Yuan Dynasty and/or Kublai Khan for Mongols before they are mentioned; prompt on partial answers)
The completion of this project was celebrated with the first ticker-tape parade held in New York City. Originally planned as a lighthouse on the Suez Canal, this project was built on  an  exclave  called  Bedloe's  Island  and rests  on  steel  infrastructure  designed  by  Gustave Eiffel. A broken chain lies at the feet of this sculpture, whose title figure holds a tablet in her left arm. Designed by Frederic Bartholdi, for ten points, what is this colossal sculpture of a crowned woman holding a torch in New York Harbor?	ANSWER: Statue of Liberty (accept Liberty Enlightening the World; accept La Liberté éclairant le monde)
During  these  conflicts,  Louis,  Prince  of  Condé  [[kaw-DAY]],  launched  a  failed  coup during the Surprise of Meaux [[MOH]]. The controversial Edict of January motivated a force led  by  the  Duke  of  Guise [[GEES]]  to  perpetrate  the  Vassy  Massacre,  beginning  these  wars. The patron of the failed Fort Caroline mission in Floride [[floh-REED]], Gaspard de Coligny [[koh-lihn-YEE]],   was   assassinated   during   these   wars   in   the   St.   Bartholomew's   Day Massacre. The persecuted Huguenot minority fought the crown forces during, for ten points, what general period of sixteenth-century wars ended by the Edict of Nantes?	ANSWER: French Wars of Religion (accept descriptive answers like Wars between the Protestants and Catholics in France before mentioned; accept Huguenots in place of Protestants in descriptive answers; prompt on "War of the Three Henrys")
This  devastating  event  was  the subject  of  the  treatise Loimologia [[loy-moh-LOH- gee-ah]]  which  was  written  by  a  physician  who  personally  witnessed  this  event,  Nathaniel Hodges.  In  an  attempt  to  stop  this  event,  the  village  of  Eyam  lost  over  200  people  after collectively participating in an early instance of quarantining for disease control. Due to this event, the royal capital moved to the cities of Salisbury and Oxford after the wealthy, led by King Charles II, fled London. For ten points, name this 17th century epidemic which ravaged England, a blight caused by Yersinia pestis.	ANSWER: The Great Plague (accept the Great Plague of London; accept the Plague of 1665; accept Plague of 1666; prompt on the "Bubonic Plague")  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 3
A  holder  of  the  position  who  resided  at  Quispiguanca  [[kwees-pee-GWAHN-kah]] employed  ethnic  groups  including  the  Cachis  as yanakunas.  A  holder  of  this  position  who built  the  Sacsayhuaman  [[sahk-say-HWAH-mahn]]  legendarily  turned  stones  into  warriors to  defend  his  city  from  the  rival  Chanka  people.  After  Vincente  de  Valverde  gave  the  last holder  of  this  position  a  Bible,  he  threw  it  back  in  his  face.  That  holder  of  this  position ordered a room to be filled with gold after being captured at the Battle of Cajamarca [[kah- hah-MAHR-kah]]. For ten points, name this royal position whose last holder was Atahualpa [[ah-tah-HWAHL-pah]].	ANSWER: Incan Emperor (or Sapa Inca; accept answers indicating the ruler of the Incan Empire)
This   activist   traveled   with   Henry   Morgenthau   Jr.'s   wife   to   the   Westmoreland Homesteads in Pennsylvania, after which residents renamed the area after the last syllables of  her  name.  165  homes  for  unemployed  local  miners  and  farmers  were  constructed  with assistance  from  this  woman  in  Arthurdale,  West  Virginia.  This  woman  resigned  from  the DAR  after  it  refused  to  allow  Marian  Anderson  to  play  Constitution  Hall, and  this diplomat served as the first Chair of the UN Commission on Human Rights. For ten points, name this longest-serving First Lady, the wife of FDR.	ANSWER: Eleanor Roosevelt (accept Anna Eleanor Roosevelt; prompt on "Roosevelt")
In this city, French GIGN commandos assisted in the liberation of a mosque in 1979 after a two-week siege. The Italian adventurer Ludovico di Varthema wrote one of the first Western  accounts  of  travel  in  this  city,  whose  metro  system  only  operates  for  seven  days per  year.  This  city  demolished  its  Ottoman  Ajyad  Fortress  in  2002  to  make  way  for  the Towers  of  the  House  hotel  complex,  which  has  the  largest  clock  face  in  the  world.  The Masjid al-Haram and the Kaaba are located in, for ten points, what holiest city of Islam?	ANSWER: Mecca (or Makkah al-Mukarramah)
One  of  these  buildings  at  Gharni  built  by  King  Tiridates  [[tee-ree-DAH-tees]]  of Armenia  was  converted into  a  summer residence by  Arsacid  Queen  Khosrovidukht  [[kohs- roh-VEE-dookt]].   To   celebrate   the   victory   at   Chaeronea   [[kay-roh-NEH-ah]],   Athenian sculptor  Leochares  [[leh-oh-KAH-rehs]]  was  commissioned  with  building  one  of  these structures  known  as  Philippeion.  The  "Sacred  Way"  connected  the  city  of  Samos  to  one  of these  locales  known  as  the Heraion.  Artemis  is  the dedicatee  of an  "Ancient Wonder of  the World" in Ephesus which is, for ten points, what type of religiously significant structure?	ANSWER: Greek Temples (accept Sanctuaries; accept equivalents)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 3
In the film X-Men: Days of Future Past,  this  person becomes  head of  the  anti-mutant movement  after  Mystique  assassinates  Bolivar  Trask.  In  another  film,  this  man  presents Forrest  Gump  the  U.S.  table  tennis  tournament  medal.  In  an  episode  of Futurama, this person presents a soldier with the Purple Heart for handing him the television remote while on the couch with his vice president, the “Headless Body of Spiro Agnew.” For ten points, name this 37th president of the United States who was involved in the Watergate Scandal.	ANSWER: Richard Nixon (or Richard Milhous Nixon)
During  this conflict,  two  girls  who  were  allegedly asked  for  instructions  on making gunpowder were captured at Wethersfield. During a pursuit of the Manisses in this conflict, several villages  were  burned  by  forces  under  Colonel  John  Endicott.  Disputes  over  the  fur trade were a cause of this conflict instigated by the murder of John Stone. Lasting from 1636 to  1638,  this  conflict  took  place  in  territory  adjacent  to  the  Connecticut  River.  For  ten points, name this war between New Englanders and a namesake tribe ended by the Treaty of Hartford.	ANSWER: Pequot War
In  1962,  a  player  of  this  instrument  and  his  orchestra  toured  the  Soviet  Union  as part  of  a  cultural  exchange  program  after  the  Cuban  Missile  Crisis.  A  player  of  this instrument, who led concerts at Guadalcanal while in the Navy, popularized Cole Porter’s "Begin  the  Beguine"  [[beh-GEEN]]  and  added  Billie  Holiday  to  his  band  in  1938.  Another player  of  this  instrument  led  his  band  in  a  rendition  of  Louis  Prima's  "Sing  Sing  Sing"  at  a monumental 1938 concert at Carnegie Hall. For ten points, name this woodwind instrument played by Artie Shaw and Benny Goodman.	ANSWER: Clarinet   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 3
The  ships Shokaku [[shoh-KAH-koo]]  and Zuikaku [[zwee-KAH-koo]]  missed  this battle due to losses in the Battle of the Coral Sea a month earlier. Tamon Yamaguchi [[tah- MOHN  yah-mah-GOO-chee]]  was  killed  during  this  battle  when  his  ship  was  scuttled following  attacks  by  aircraft  from  the Enterprise.  One side  in  this  battle  lost  the  carrier Yorktown but, under Chester Nimitz, managed to sink four Japanese carriers. For ten points, name  this  1942  naval  battle  near  a  namesake  atoll,  a  decisive  American  victory  in  the Pacific.	ANSWER: Battle of Midway
Some  of  this  country's merchants  were swept  off  their  route  to Ningbo  by  a  storm, landing in one of the Osumi Islands. An admiral from this country survived the shipwreck of the Flower of the Sea,  but  lost  treasure  obtained  from  the  conquest  of  Malacca.  Matchlock guns  were  introduced  to  Japan  by  this  country,  whose  general  Afonso  de  Albuquerque served  as  the  first  Duke  of  Goa.  Caravels  were  developed  by,  for  ten  points,  what  country which was home to Vasco da Gama?	ANSWER: Kingdom of Portugal (accept Reino de Portugal; accept República Portuguesa; accept Portuguese Republic)
This  man  became  the  first  sitting  holder  of  his  position  to  knowingly  and  openly break  the  law  due  to  visiting  an  island  belonging  to  Aga  Khan  IV.  Though  not  Ralph Northam, this man admitted that he sang “Day-O” while wearing blackface. The SNC-Lavalin affair  during  this  man's  administration  was  investigated  by  the  Mounties  and  extensively covered by The Globe and Mail. For ten points, name this leader of the Liberal Party, elected prime minister of Canada in 2015.	ANSWER: Justin Trudeau
One victory for this man prompted him to exclaim “I’m the big buck of this lick.” This man defeated Jack Armstrong of the Clary’s Grove Boys, who allegedly bullied settlers by rolling  them  down  a  hill  in  a  locked  barrel.  Hank  Thompson  was  the  only  person  to  ever throw this man, whom he fought while a soldier in the Black Hawk War. This inductee into the  National  Wrestling  Hall  of  Fame  was  noted  for  his  large,  six-foot,  four-inch  frame.  For ten points, name this backcountry wrestler and sixteenth U.S. president.	ANSWER: Abraham Lincoln  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 2
During the 1920s, this country printed posters reading “men for the land” and “women for the home” as part of its “men, money, and markets” campaign. In 1924, voting was  made  mandatory  in  this  country,  in  which  Walter  Burley  Griffin  won  a  competition  to design  the  capital.  A  set  of  1907  protests  against  restrictive  bathing  suits  was  held  in  this country. An Avro 504 biplane was the first aircraft of the Qantas [[KWON-tas]] airline of, for ten points, what country, which hosted the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney?	ANSWER: Commonwealth of Australia
The ship La Belle intended to reach this river, though it sank at Matagorda Bay. That attempt  to  build  a  colony  at  this  river's  mouth  resulted  in  a  mutiny  and  the  death  of  the Sieur [[SYUHR]] de La Salle. The first Europeans to map this river were Louis Jolliet [[zhol- YEH]]  and  Jacques  Marquette,  though  its  first  documented  crossing  by  a  European  was  by Hernando de Soto. France founded New Orleans on, for ten points, what river?	ANSWER: Mississippi River
On The  Tonight  Show  with  Jay  Leno,  this  man  was  portrayed  by  Christopher  B. Duncan.  In  one  internet  appearance,  this  man’s  rival  says  that  he  is  a  “stuttering communist" before Abraham Lincoln appears. In a sketch from Key and Peele, Luther serves as this man’s “Anger Translator.” In an Epic Rap Battle of History, this man claims that a rival’s victory would result in a “first, second, and a third lady.” For ten points, name  this president,  who  appeared  frequently  in  popular  media  during  his  2012  campaign  against Mitt Romney.	ANSWER: Barack Obama
This religious order was highlighted when Athanasius Kircher [[ATH-uh-NAY-shuss KER-shuh]] transcribed the exploits of Johann Grueber, the first European to travel to Tibet. This religious order’s 1767 expulsion from Spain occurred when the Count of Campomanes [[kahm-poh-MAH-nehs]] convinced Phillip III that they instigated the Esquilache [[eh-skee- LAH-cheh]]  Riots.  Pope  Francis was  the  first  person  of  this  order  to  ascend  to  the  papacy. For ten points, name this Catholic holy order founded by Ignatius of Loyola.	ANSWER: Society of Jesus (accept Jesuit(s) Order; accept Societas Iesu; prompt on "SJ")
The Knapp Commission divided this organization's members into "meat eaters" and "grass  eaters"  following  the  shooting  of  Frank  Serpico.  This  organization,  which  was responsible  for  the  death  of  Amadou  Diallo  [[AH-meh-doo  dee-AH-loh]],  made  use  of  the CompStat program under Commissioner Bill Bratton. A member of this organization, Daniel Pantaleo, used an illegal chokehold that resulted in the death of Eric Garner. For ten points, name this law enforcement agency, based out of Lower Manhattan.	ANSWER: New York City Police Department (accept NYPD; or City of New York Police Department)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 2
Intense  fighting  in  this  battle  took  place  at  Mamayev  Kurgan  and  Railway  Station Number  One.  During  this  battle,  the  Romanian  and  Hungarian  flanks  supporting  the  6th Army  Division  were  targeted  by  Georgy  Zhukov  [[ZHOO-kuff]]  during  Operation  Uranus. Leading  to  the  surrender  of  Friedrich  Paulus,  this  battle  reversed  the  loser's  gains  made during  Operation  Barbarossa.  For  ten  points,  name  this  battle,  the  bloodiest  of  World  War Two, in which the Soviets pushed back the German advance.	ANSWER: Battle of Stalingrad   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 2
President  and  position  required.  The  first  holder  of  this  position  under  this  president  earned  a nickname during the selection process for the state flower of Texas. The second holder of this position also served as Secretary of Agriculture under this same president. The third holder of this position held it for less than a year after being nominated to it in an event called the “Second Missouri Compromise.” For ten  points,  what  is  this  position  that  John  Garner,  Henry  Wallace,  and  Harry  Truman  held  under  this president?	ANSWER:VicePresident ofFranklin DelanoRoosevelt(acceptFDR)
One  of  these  places  in  Minsk,  called  “The  Pit,”  shows  a  group  of  people  descending  a  staircase. Another one of these places in Germany has a constantly looping video of two men kissing. The newest of these installations in the Tiergarten has a memorial pool in the shape of a wheel, with a triangle in the center, and honors the Romani people. For ten points, name these commemorative public art institutions, the largest of which is Berlin’s Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe.	ANSWER:Holocaust Memorials(accept equivalents formemorial, such asmonumentorstatues; prompt on more general answers that don’t mention theHolocaust, like “World War II Memorials”)
While in Sweden, this person learned Swedish to work with Anders Bruzelius on civil procedure. In Frontiero v. Richardson, this person argued that Air Force Lieutenant Sharron Frontiero could claim her husband as a “dependent.” Replacing Byron White in 1993, this person authored an opinion on gender discrimination at the Virginia Military Institute. For ten points, name this woman who died in September, 2020, the second female Supreme Court justice.	ANSWER: Ruth BaderGinsburg(acceptR.B.G.)
This man refused to visit victims of the Great Mississippi Flood due to his belief that it would be political grandstanding. Democrat John W. Davis and Progressive Robert LaFollette both lost an election to this man. This man responded to a Samuel Gompers telegram by claiming that “there is no right to strike  against  public  safety,”  gaining  national  attention  for  his  suppression  of  the  Boston  Police  Strike. For ten points, name this “silent” president who succeeded Warren Harding.	ANSWER: CalvinCoolidge
A novel about a folk hero from this country has a style that parallels that title character’s Jerilderie Letter. Another novel by an author from this country focuses on a man who received the title “Righteous Among Nations” at the Yad Vashem Memorial for his efforts in convincing German authorities that he needed  to  hire  Jews  during  World  War  Two.  For  ten  points,  name  this  home  country  of  the  author  of Schindler’s Ark, Thomas Keneally, and of the bushranger Ned Kelly.	ANSWER: Commonwealth ofAustralia Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
At a World War One battle off the coast of this country, the SMS Emden quickly sank the Zhemchug and  Mousquet.  A  region  in  this  country  includes  an  island  once  named  for  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  a capital  city  named  for  George  III,  George  Town.  The  Battle  of  Penang  took  place  in  what  is  now  this country in the Strait of Malacca. Tunku Abdul Rahman was the first Prime Minister of, for ten points, what Asian country that expelled Singapore in 1965?	ANSWER:Malaysia
Three days after this event, a ceremony was held that is depicted in the painting The Distribution of the Eagle Standards. Pope Pius VII was present at this event, three years after signing a Concordat with this event’s central figure. This event took place at Notre Dame Cathedral instead of the traditional Reims [RONCE], and a David [dah-VEED] painting of this event depicts a kneeling Josephine. For ten points, name this December 2, 1804 event in which a Frenchman crowned himself emperor.	ANSWER:CoronationofNapoleon(accept descriptions ofNapoleonbecomingemperor)
The first Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps was established at this university by Chester Nimitz. A memorial for James Rector was held in this university’s Sproul Plaza after a violent protest at its People’s Park. The Symbionese Liberation Army kidnapped Patty Hearst while she studied at this university. This university is named for an idealist Anglo-Irish philosopher and is known for its activism during the Free Speech Movement. For ten points, name this public California university.	ANSWER: U(niversity) of C(alifornia),Berkeley(prompt on “Cal” or “California”)
This  artist  wrote  and  recorded  the  song  “Happy  Birthday”  to  advocate  for  Martin  Luther  King, Jr.  Day  becoming  a  federal  holiday.  This  musician’s  “classic  period”  was  from  1972  to  1977,  when  he released the albums Talking Book and Songs in the Key of Life. This man acknowledged influential Black musicians in the song “Sir Duke” and became the youngest ever to top the charts at age 13 in 1963. For ten points, name this influential R&B musician who wrote “For Once in My Life” and “Superstition.”	ANSWER: StevieWonder(accept Stevland HardawayMorrisor Stevland HardawayJudkins)
This man placed a likeness of his own head onto the Colossus of Nero and declared that he was the “only left handed fighter to conquer twelve times one thousand men.” Twenty-five consuls were appointed in  a  single  year  after  this  man’s  advisor  Cleander  sold  public  offices.  This  man  was  strangled  by  the wrestler  Narcissus  after  the  Plebeian  games,  where  he  had  slain  hundreds  of  beasts  in  an  attempt  to identify as Hercules. For ten points, identify this emperor, the son of Marcus Aurelius.	ANSWER:Commodus Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 2
This man forced the Armistice of Mudanya upon his enemies, triggering the downfall of David Lloyd George’s government. This man’s opposition to the Treaty of Sevres allowed him to win a more favorable territorial  settlement  in  the  Treaty  of  Lausanne.  After  consolidating  power,  this  man’s  “Six  Arrows” ideology promoted a new Latin alphabet for the country and banned the fez. For ten points, name this man who established a new capital at Ankara after founding modern-day Turkey	ANSWER: Mustafa Kemal(acceptAtaturk)
A position outside this city was fortified by Rufus Putnam during one event whose end is celebrated as Evacuation Day. During one battle, Henry Knox reinforced this city’s Dorchester Heights with cannons from Fort Ticonderoga. This city was besieged by American forces following the battles of Lexington and Concord. The Battle of Bunker Hill was fought outside of, for ten points, what Massachusetts city where British troops had earlier committed a namesake massacre?	ANSWER: Boston
This man arrested William Burroughs after he opposed this man’s plans to sail to the Isle of Terceira. This man destroyed at least 27 Spanish ships at the Bay of C ́adiz in the Singeing of the King of Spain’s Beard.  This  man  sacked  Santo  Domingo  and  captured  Cartagena  de  Indias  in  1586  before  fortuitously rescuing Walter Raleigh’s Roanoke Colony. For ten points, name this Elizabethan captain of theGolden Hindwho circumnavigated the world from 1577 to 1580.	ANSWER: Sir Francis Drake
This man’s government planned but failed to attack a western neighbor in Project National Glory. Peace  Memorial  Day  commemorates  a  massacre  by  this  man’s  regime  known  as  the  228  Incident.  This Commandant of the Whampoa Academy was kidnapped by Zhang Xueliang during the Xi’an Incident, forcing  him  to  collaborate  with  a  group  that  would  later  force  this  husband  of  Soong  Mei-Ling  to  flee to Taiwan. For ten points, name this leader of the Kuomintang who lost the Chinese Civil War to Mao Zedong.	ANSWER: ChiangKai-Shek (acceptJiangJieshi, acceptChiangChongchen)
Before this event, George Cortelyou attempted to cancel another man’s appearance twice, but was overruled. Roswell Park was driven by “Pan Am” Charlie from Niagara Falls to Buffalo in the wake of this event. Thomas Edison sent an X-ray machine to the victim of this event who was treated at the Milburn House. This event took place at the Temple of Music as part of the Pan-American Exposition. For ten points, name this 1901 event in which Leon Czolgosz [CHO-goss] shot the President of the United States.	ANSWER:assassinationof WilliamMcKinley Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 2
One book written in this language argued that God did not choose to create the universe, but that his divine nature caused the universe to be. Another book in this language argued that memory is the result of  continued  abstraction  or  spiritualization.  Another  work  in  this  language  was  criticized  by  Aquinas for its introduction of the “unity of the intellect.” For 10 points, name this language used by al-Farabi, Averroes, and other Islamic commentators on Aristotle.	ANSWER: Arabicoral-ArabiyyahorArabi
In this city, Ambassador Graham Martin was picked up by “Lady Ace 09” whose crew had orders to arrest him if he attempted to stay. The USSBlue Ridgewas so overloaded by one event in this city that its  crew  began  throwing  vehicle  s  into  the  sea.  Irving  Berlin’s  “White  Christmas”  was  used  to  begin  a series of evacuations in this city that began after the shelling of Tan Son Nhat airport. Operation Frequent Wind was a series of helicopter evacuations of, for ten points, what capital of South Vietnam that was renamed after its fall in 1975?	ANSWER: Saigon(acceptHoChiMinhCitybefore it is read)
This site included the Mach’ay Cave, where young boys had their ears pierced as a rite of passage. At this site, the Watana Stone was arranged to point at the sun during winter solstices. This site’s other religious buildings included the Room of the Three Windows and the Torreon. Located above the Sacred Valley, this site was discovered when the Urubamba River was traversed by Hiram Bingham’s party. For ten points, identify this “Lost City” of the Incas.	ANSWER: MacchuPicchu
Vala attempted to flee this battle during fighting at Kalkriese hill. A campaign waged in vengeance for this battle culminated in the Battle of Idistaviso, which was won by Germanicus. This battle’s winning commander led an alliance of tribes including the Cherusci. This battle’s result caused Augustus to rage, “Quintilius  Varus,  give  me  back  my  legions!”  Arminius  and  his  German  allies  inflicted,  for  ten  points, what decisive 9 AD Roman defeat in a namesake forest?	ANSWER: Battle of the TeutoburgForest
In a work by this author, a man becomes obsessed with and then terrified by an infinitely long book. When reflecting on a conflict, this author called a war in his country “two bald men fighting over a comb.” This author described a point in space that contains all other points in one work, and described a system of infinite hexagonal rooms in his “Library of Babel.” For ten points, name this author of “The Zahir,” “El Aleph,” and “The Garden of Forking Paths.”	ANSWER: Jorge Luis Borges Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 2
This  man  dispatched  dragoons  to  kidnap  the  Duc  d’Enghien[“duke”den-gh’yen].  This  man,  who was prohibited from joining the army due to a foot injury in his youth, was removed from one of his posts after embracing the notorious Civil Constitution of the Clergy. This one-time Bishop of Autun demanded bribes of American diplomats in 1797. For ten points, name this French diplomat who represented France during the Congress of Vienna and instigated the XYZ Affair.	ANSWER: Charles-Maurice de TalleyrandPerigord
This president signed the Matthew Shepard Hate Crimes Prevention Act, which expanded the 1969 federal  hate-crimes  law  and  required  the  FBI  to  track  statistics  on  hate  crimes  on  the  basis  of  gender. Other major statutes passed under this president include the Ledbetter Fair Pay Act and a repeal of the Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell policy. This president issued the DACA and DAPA executive orders on immigration and enacted the Dodd-Frank Act. For ten points, name this president, after whom the Affordable Care Act was nicknamed.	ANSWER: Barack Obama
TheGeorgios Averofmanaged to perform this action during the Battle of Elli. This devastating feat was  most  recently  carried  out  by  Jesse  Oldendorf  against  the  enemy  line  during  the  Battle  of  Surigao Strait.  Zinovy  Rozhestvensky  was  decisively  defeated  by  a  performance  of  this  action  that  relied  on wireless  telegraphy  to  coordinate  Admiral  Togo’s  orders.  During  the  Battle  of  Tsushima  Strait,  the Japanese fleet was twice able to pull off, for ten points, what now-obsolete naval maneuver, performed by traveling perpendicular to a line of enemy ships?	ANSWER: crossingtheT(orcappingtheT)
This woman served as the first president of the New England Woman Suffrage Association, and her husband  Samuel  was  a  member  of  the  Secret  Six.  A  pacifist  Mother’s  Day  Proclamation  was  issued  by this  woman,  who  wrote  a  work  that  describes  a  figure  who  “loosed  the  fateful  lightning  of  His  terrible swift sword;” that work adopted the melody used in “John Brown’s Body” and repeats the line “glory, glory, hallelujah!” For ten points, name this lyricist of the “Battle Hymn of the Republic.”	ANSWER: Julia Ward Howe
Prussia’s  King  Frederick  William  IV  commissioned  this  man  to  write  music  for  a  play  featuring the  song  “Ye  spotted  snakes.”  Queen  Victoria  once  claimed  her  favorite  piece  by  this  man  was  a  song actually composed by his sister, Fanny. A visit to the ruins of Holyrood Chapel inspired this man’s third symphony,  as  well  as  hisHebrides Overture.  TheScottishSymphony  was  composed  by,  for  ten  points, what composer whose music forA Midsummer Night’s Dreamfeatures a famous “Wedding March?”	ANSWER: Felix Mendelssohn-Bartholdy Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
This  institution  was  heavily  damaged  in  a  Christmas  Eve  1851  fire  that  destroyed  the  majority  of its holdings. Charles Coffin Jewett competed with this organization while working for the Smithsonian. Ainsworth Rand Spofford wanted to make this institution a “repository of American culture” and lobbied for it to receive two copies of copyrighted items. After this institution was sacked by the British, Thomas Jefferson  sold  his  personal  collection  to  it.  For  ten  points,  name  this  institution,  the  de  facto  national library of the United States.	ANSWER: LibraryofCongress(prompt on Congress)
Bayesian games model this value as a probability distribution. Michael Spence identified education as a “costly signal” of this value in a job market model, which described one method of its transmission. George Akerlof’s 1970 paper “The Market for Lemons” used the example of used car dealerships to discuss the asymmetry of this value. For ten points, name this economic concept that is “perfect” if both actors have complete knowledge.	ANSWER: information
A ruler of this country formally became its king at the Congress of Lutsk, but died before the crown could physically reach him. A leader of this country defeated Skirgaila before signing the Astrava treaty with  Jogaila,  allowing  him  to  replace  Skirgaila  as  regent  of  this  country.  Vytautas  ruled  this  country, which  joined  with  its  southwestern  neighbor  in  the  Union  of  Krewo  and  the  Union  of  Lublin.  For  ten points, name this Grand Duchy that formed a commonwealth with Poland.	ANSWER: Grand Duchy of Lithuania
This event was prominently supported by Paul Scoon, who was liberated from house arrest during it. After a lengthy air assault, Army Rangers seized Port Salines International Airport during this event. Hudson Austin fell from power and the New Jewel Movement dissolved as a result of this event, which was codenamed  “Operation  Urgent  Fury.”  The  execution  of  Maurice  Bishop  triggered,  for  ten  points,  what 1983 military action ordered by Ronald Reagan against a Caribbean island nation?	ANSWER: United States’ invasionofGrenada(accept clear equivalents for invasion, likeoccupation)
Kathleen Lynch cites the presence of bones of “butchered animals” as evidence that the Persians did not commit this action as a deliberate military tactic. Finnish soldiers committed this action using animal feces during their retreat in the Winter War. In the aftermath of the Kanto Earthquake, Koreans were often attacked after being accused of doing this. Synagogues were attacked during the Middle Ages as Jews were falsely blamed for spreading the plague via, for ten points, what specific type of biological warfare?	ANSWER: poisoningwater(accept  more  specific  answers,  likepoisoningwells;  prompt  on  partial answers like “damaging wells” or “biological warfare”) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 2
While living in East Aurora, this president appointed Nathan Hall as his clerk, and he would go on to serve as this man’s Postmaster General. While serving on the Ways and Means Committee, this man helped author the Black Tariff. This President finished third in the Election of 1856 while running under the  Know-Nothing  Party.  The  Fugitive  Slave  Act  of  1850  was  passed  under  the  presidency  of,  for  ten points, what successor to Zachary Taylor?	ANSWER: Millard Fillmore
During  this  war,  the  Treaty  of  Ilbersheim  stripped  Maximilian  Emanuel  of  his  lands  after  he  was defeated, along with the Duc de Tallard, near Hochstadt. Great Britain gained a monopoly on the Atlantic slave  trade  when  theasientowas  transferred  at  the  end  of  this  war,  in  which  the  Battle  of  Blenheim [BLEN-em]  was  fought.  This  war  was  sparked  by  the  death  of  Charles  II  and  ended  by  the  Treaty  of Utrecht.  For  ten  points,  name  this  war  in  which  Philip  V  extended  Bourbon  rule  to  a  certain  Iberian country.	ANSWER: War of theSpanishSuccession
This  event  was  the  result  of  the  “Biennio  Rosso,”  or  “two  red  years.”  A  king refused  to  authorize Luigi Facta’s use of force to stop this event, which led to the following year’s Acerbo [ah-chair-boh] Law granting one party a parliamentary majority. Michele[mee-KAY-leh] Bianchi and Cesare[CHAY-sar-ay] Vecchi organized this event, which prompted Victor Emmanuel III to transfer power to the leader of the Blackshirts. For ten points, name this event in which Benito Mussolini seized power after his men entered the capital city of Italy.	ANSWER: MarchonRome(accept additional information, like Mussolini’s Blackshirtsmarchingon Rome)
Leibniz’s  version  of  this  invention  made  use  of  ten  “teeth.”  Wilhelm  Schickard’s  drawings  of  these devices  predate  Blaise  Pascal’s  commonly  cited  “invention”  of  them.  Early  modern  examples  of  these devices  utilized  Reverse  Polish  notation.  Hewlett  Packard  released  one  of  these  devices  in  1972  that allowed for operations equivalent to what could be done by slide rules. For ten points, name these devices, produced by companies like Texas Instruments, which allow you to perform mathematical computations.	ANSWER: mechanical calculators (prompt on computer)
This man rose to prominence as a subordinate of John Jervis at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent. This man’s forces intercepted Pierre-Charles Villeneuve after they left Cadiz. This man, who lost an arm while leading an attack on Copenhagen, ordered that the message “England expects that every man will do his duty” be sent aboard his flagship, theHMS  Victory. For ten points, name this British admiral who won the Battle of Trafalgar.	ANSWER: Horatio Nelson Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
This non-Europe continent’s “Character” was described in an 1830 work by Hegel that elucidated the idea of the “Absolute” in philosophy. Jean-Paul Sartre wrote the preface to one work by an author from this country that applied Marxist principles to colonialism; that work was Frantz Fanon’sThe  Wretched of the Earth. Edward Said[sai-eed] argued against the stereotyping of the northern part of this non-Asia continent in hisOrientalism. For ten points, name this continent that was divided up by Europe during its namesake “Scramble” in the late-19th century.	ANSWER: Africa
Sailors  aboard  this  ship  launched  an  expedition  to  Corn  Hill,  which  was  then  looted,  according  to Nathaniel  Philbrick.  On  one  voyage,  this  ship  was  forced  to  abandon  the  leakingSpeedwell.  Passengers aboard  this  ship  included  the  captain  Christopher  Jones,  military  advisor  Myles  Standish,  and  future governor William Bradford. For ten points, name this ship that landed at Plymouth Rock, carrying the first pilgrims to the New World in 1620.	ANSWER: Mayflower
This  composer  included  a  piece  in  memory  of  Emperor  Maximillian  in  the  third  of  hisYears  of Pilgrimagesuites.  He  wrote  a  piece  that  depicted  a  Cossack  hetman  being  tied  to  a  galloping  horse, Mazeppa. This composer’s “Bagatelle without tonality” was meant to be his fourth Mephisto Waltz, and he wrote twelve particularly difficult Transcendental Etudes. For ten points, name this Romantic piano virtuoso who composed nineteenHungarian Rhapsodiesand inspired a namesake “mania.”	ANSWER: Franz Liszt(orLisztFerenc)
Frederick Douglass once said that it was easier to do this activity well “than to repair broken men.” A  book  about  this  activity  downplays  the  importance  of  rigid  schedules  and,  in  its  seventh  edition, advocated a vegetarian diet aimed at combating obesity. That book on this activity was the best-selling book in twentieth-century America after the Bible and famously begins “Trust yourself. You know more than you think you do.” For ten points, name this activity for which a proper method was outlined by Benjamin Spock, a pediatrician.	ANSWER: raisingchildren(acceptparenting; accept “buildstrongchildren”, the exact Douglass quote; accept equivalents that relate toraisingbabiesand/ortoddlers)
This country passed the Objectives Resolution as the basis for its constitution. It fought a nationalist movement  in  its  eastern  half  with  Operation  Searchlight  and  its  incursion  across  the  Line  of  Control started the Kargil War. The Lahore Resolution proposed the creation of this country, which lies on the northwest side of the Radcliffe Line. For ten points, name this South Asian nation that, in 1967, officially moved its capital from Rawalpindi to Islamabad.	ANSWER: Islamic Republic ofPakistan Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 2
Nearly 2,000 people died when theSultanaexploded in this river, but John Wilkes Booth died the day before, so the tragedy received shockingly little press coverage. Monks Mound was built on the eastern banks of this river, which names a civilization that built the city of Cahokia. A control structure was built to reduce its flow into the Atchafalaya River. For ten points, name this American river whose source was identified in 1832 as Minnesota’s Lake Itasca, from which it flows to the Gulf of Mexico.	ANSWER: MississippiRiver
One  performer  of  this  instrument  wrote  theHohenfriedberger  Marchto  celebrate  victory  in  the Second Silesian War. This is the first instrument to play the melody in Ravel’sBolero, and a solo near the low end of its range opens Debussy’sPrelude to the Afternoon of a Faun. A treatise on playing this instrument  was  written  by  Johann  Quantz,  who  taught  Frederick  the  Great.  For  ten  points,  name  this transverse woodwind instrument whose higher-pitched relatives include the fife and piccolo.	ANSWER: flute
The success of this work led to a plagiarization lawsuit from Harold Courlander. Sequels to this work include “The Gift” and “The Next Generations.” Tom Moore teaches the intricacies of cockfighting in this series,  in  which  Jemmy  deserts  the  Confederate  Army.  It  ends  with  Chicken  George  tracing  his  lineage from  Africa  to  Tennessee.  ABC  aired  this  series,  an  adaptation  of  a  “Saga  of  an  American  Family,”  in 1977. For ten points, name this novel and TV miniseries about Kunta Kinte, inspired by the ancestors of author Alex Haley.	ANSWER: Roots
A  commando  raid  on  Kwale  killed  11  Italians  working  in  this  industry  and  also  captured  14  more workers. The Kaiama Declaration demanded the withdrawal of this industry from land held by the Ijaw people. For his efforts to protect the Ogoni people from human rights violations from companies extracting this  resource,  Ken  Saro-Wiwa  was  executed  in  1995  by  the  government  of  Sani  Abacha  in  a  country where this resource is refined in Port Harcourt. For ten points, name this resource extracted in Nigeria by companies like Royal Dutch Shell.	ANSWER: crude oil
In this country, a moral pressure known as “window guidance” prevented banks from making major lending  pushes.  A  company  based  in  this  country  introduced  the  “just  in  time”  system  to  improve efficiency. This country’s prime minister suggested a “Three Arrows” approach to address its low inflation rate, decreasing productivity, and aging working population. “Abenomics”[ah-bay-nomics] was undertaken in,  for  ten  points,  what  country  that  experienced  the  “Lost  Decade”  after  poor  economic  performance from companies such as Toyota and Sony?	ANSWER: Japan Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 2
This  character  notes  “that  Nature  might  stand  up  /  and  say  to  all  the  world,  ‘This  was  a  man!’” while this man a fallen opponent. This character claims that “the evil that men do lives after them” after asking “Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears” as he comes to “bury” his fallen friend, “not to praise him.” For ten points, name this character from Shakespeare’sJulius Caesarwho joins Octavius in fighting Cassius and Brutus after Caesar’s assassination.	ANSWER: MarcAntony(acceptMarcusAntonius; in both answers, accept either name, and accept either underlined name)
A video taken at this event shows a Mi-8 helicopter colliding with a cable suspended from a crane, causing  the  helicopter  to  crash.  The  TORCH  Report  predicted  tens  of  thousands  of  deaths  due  to  the effects of this event. This was the first event to be classified as a INES level 7. Thesamoselyillegally live in the “zone of alienation” near the site of this event; that exclusion zone includes the Red Forest and the city of Pripyat, which became a ghost town in this event’s aftermath. For ten points, name this 1986 meltdown of a Ukrainian nuclear power plant.	ANSWER: Chernobyldisaster (accept additional information and synonyms of disaster)
While serving as this President’s Secretary of War, George Crawford was implicated in the Galphin Affair.  This  President’s  Secretary  of  State  negotiated  an  effort  to  build  the  Nicaragua  Canal  in  the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty. Before becoming president, this man defeated Santa Anna at the Battle of Buena Vista  during  the  Mexican-American  War.  For  ten  points,  name  this  President,  nicknamed  “Old  Rough and Ready,” whose death after a year in office promoted Millard Fillmore to the presidency.	ANSWER: ZacharyTaylor
A  1911  revolt  in  this  city's  Wuchang  district  led  to  the  Xinhai  [[SHIN-"HIGH"]] Revolution,  which  ended  the  Qing  [[CHING]]  Dynasty.  One  preliminary  attack  on  this  city was  repelled  in  the  "Two-Eighteen  Air  Battle."  The  Nationalist  government  moved  its primary operations to this city after the fall of Nanjing. After a four-month long battle, this city fell to the Japanese in 1938. For ten points, name this historical transportation hub and "Chicago  of  China"  where  the  coronavirus  that  caused  the  COVID-19  pandemic  was  first discovered.	ANSWER: Wuhan
This man attempted to have his cadets punished after they drew caricatures of him with the nickname "square box" due to his exceptionally large shoe size. The preserved hide of  this  man's  horse,  Little  Sorrel, is  on  display  at  the  Virginia  Military  Institute,  where  this man once taught. This general died from pneumonia brought upon by his amputation after he  was  shot  by  friendly  fire  at  the  Battle  of  Chancellorsville.  For  ten  points,  name  this Confederate general who earned his famous nickname due to his heroics at Bull Run.	ANSWER: Thomas "Stonewall" Jackson (or Thomas Jonathan Jackson)
In 2020, DNA paternity tests revealed that one holder of this position had fathered a child  out  of  wedlock  with  Sybille  de Selys  Longchamps.  The  first  holder  of  this  position declined  to  take  up  the  throne  of  Greece  under  the  1830  London  Protocol.  One  man  who took  this  title  in  2013  resides  at  the  Palace  of  Laeken  [[LAY-kehn]]  and  claimed  this  title after the sudden abdication of his father, Albert II. For ten points, name this title, once held by a man who was known for atrocities committed in the Congo Free State, Leopold II.	ANSWER: King of Belgium (or King of the Belgians; or Koning der Belgen; or Roi des Belges; or König der Belgier; accept synonyms such as "monarch" or "ruler" in place of "king")
Due  most  likely  to  the  docking  of  the  SS  Talune,  over  90  percent  of  this  region's residents  became  infected  with  the  Spanish  Flu.  A  proposed  colonial  flag  for  this  region featured  three  white  palm  trees  on  a  red  shield.  This  region's  second  civil  war  ended  with the  Tripartite  Convention  of  1899,  which  divided  administration  of  this  region  between Germany  and  the  United  States.  For  ten  points,  name  this  region  that  contained  the last colonial acquisition of the German Empire and the only U.S. territory south of the equator.	ANSWER: Samoa (or Independent State of Samoa; or Malo Saʻoloto Tutoʻatasi o Sāmoa; accept American Samoa; accept German Samoa; accept Deutsch Samoa)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 4
A  building  named  for  this  man  had  to  sand  down  panels  on  the  Founders  Room  to avoid  concentrating  sunlight  on  nearby  residences.  Acoustic  designers  Minoru  Nagata  and Yasuhisa  Toyota  created  the  interior  of  that  building  named  for  this  man,  whose  exterior architecture  was  designed  by  Frank  Gehry  and  which  is  the  home  of  the  Los  Angeles Philharmonic.  Another  complex  named  after  this  man  contains  long-running  sections  such as  Critter  Country,  Adventureland,  and  Main  Street  U.S.A.  For  ten  points,  identify  this animator  and  namesake  of  "Land"  and  "World"  theme  park  complexes  in  California  and Florida.	ANSWER: Walt Disney (or Walter Elias Disney; accept Disneyland and Walt Disney World; accept Walt Disney Concert Hall)
This territory is home to a namesake petrel, also known as the Cahow [[KAY-how]], which  was  thought  to  have  been  extinct  for  three  hundred  years  until  its  rediscovery  in 1951. While en route to Jamestown, George Somers’s shipwrecked fleet used smaller boats to  colonize  this  island.  During  the  English Civil  War,  this  island's  governor,  William  Sayle, moved  its  anti-royalist  inhabitants  to  the  Bahamas.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  overseas British dependency that names a “Triangle” known for odd disappearances.	ANSWER: Bermuda (accept Bermuda Triangle)
The  length  of  the  case Swidler & Berlin v. United States,  a  case  involving  this  man's administration,  led  to  the  demise  of  the  independent  counsel  at  the  federal  level.  Kenneth Starr  exonerated  this  man,  but  not  his  wife,  in  the  so-called  "Travelgate," which  dealt  with the  sudden  firing  of  seven  employees  in  an  act  of  cronyism.  Linda  Tripp  leaked  intimate phone calls between a White House intern and this man, leading to perjury charges and an impeachment  trial.  The  Whitewater  and  Lewinsky  scandals  rocked  the  administration  of, for ten points, what Democratic president?	ANSWER: Bill Clinton (or William Jefferson Clinton; accept William Jefferson Blythe III)
One psychologist used his experiences in one of these places to outline his theory of logotherapy.  One  philosopher  controversially  claimed  that  keeping  a  positive  outlook  was necessary  for  survival  in  these  places  in  the  book Man's  Search  for  Meaning.  One  of  the primary  developers  of  these  places  was  used  as  an  example  of  the  "banality  of  evil"  in Hannah Arendt's book Eichmann in Jerusalem. Victor Frankl wrote about his time in, for ten points, what locations where the majority of killings during the Holocaust took place?	ANSWER: Nazi concentration camps (accept Konzentrationslager; accept Extermination camps; accept Death camps; accept Killing centers; accept specific examples like Auschwitz; prompt on "prisons" or "camps")  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 4
One  god  who  appeared  as  one  of  these  animals,  Orochi,  was  defeated  by  the  hero Susano'o [[soo-SAH-nah OH]], who found the "Grass-Cutting Sword" in its tail. A traditional symbol  of  medicine,  the  Rod  of  Asclepius,  depicts  these  creatures,  which  were  allowed  to freely crawl near patients in Ancient Greece. One legend claims conquistador Hernan Cortes was mistake for Quetzalcoatl, a "feathered" example of, for ten points, what type of reptile, which supposedly tempted Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden?	ANSWER: Snakes (accept Serpents; accept Dragons before "Asclepius" is mentioned)
This  individual’s tweet about receiving the COVID-19  vaccine  was  branded  by  Ted Cruz  as  “government  propaganda.”  Nearly  50  years  earlier,  this  character  was  seen receiving an injection in a public service campaign to get more children vaccinated against measles. NASA invited this character to join the Challenger flight to teach kids about space, and  Mitt  Romney  said  that  he  loves  this  character,  despite  wanting  to  cut  taxpayer  money from PBS. From 1969 to 2018, Caroll Spinney portrayed, for ten points, what Sesame Street character, an eight foot-tall avian?	ANSWER: Big Bird   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 4
Pierre  Landais  [[lahn-DEH]]  supported  a  rebellion  against  this  man  by  the  Duke  of Brittany. This husband of Anne Neville faced a revolt by the Duke of Buckingham after this man  seized  the  throne  from  the  child  of  his brother,  Edward  IV.  In  late  2012,  this  man's skeleton  was  identified  beneath  the  former  site  of  Greyfriars  Church.  A  landing  at  Milford Haven in 1485 was a precursor to this man becoming the last English king to die in battle. For  ten  points,  name  this  man who  lost  the  Battle  of  Bosworth  Field  to  the  future  Tudor king, Henry VII.	ANSWER: Richard III (prompt on "Richard")
This  figure  revealed  the  island  of  Anaphe  [[AH-nah-feh]]  in  order  to  shelter  the Argonauts. Heracles completed his labors for Eurystheus [[yoo-RISS-thee-us]] at this being's command.  This  deity  won  a  music  contest  against  Pan  and  turned  King  Midas's  ears  into those  of  a  donkey.  The  patron  deity  of  Delphi,  this  figure  was  often  conflated  with  Helios, god  of  the  sun.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Greek  god  of  prophecy,  archery,  and  music,  the twin brother of Artemis.	ANSWER: Apollo (or Apollon)
Near the end of this decade, Amalia Post led a successful campaign to enact women's suffrage in the Wyoming Territory, though the lack of nationwide women’s enfranchisement led  Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton  to  oppose  the  15th  amendment  which  was  passed  during  this decade.   Activism   in   this   decade   followed   a   four-year   conflict   that   ended   with   the assassination  of  Abraham  Lincoln  following  the surrender  of  Robert  E.  Lee. For  ten  points, name this decade during which Reconstruction began after the U.S. Civil War.	ANSWER: 1860s
Graham   Stevenson   criticized   this   show   for   erroneously   portraying   Winston Churchill as Home Secretary during one period. In this series, December 3, 1919, is decided upon as Black Star Day on which one group challenges Billy Kimber’s pitches at the Worcester  [[WOO-ster]]  Races.  Sam  Neill  portrays  an  Ulster  Protestant  policeman  in  this show following and titled for an historical street gang comprised of working class men who dressed  in  distinctive  tailored  clothes.  For  ten  points,  name  this  BBC  crime  drama  which focuses on historical rivalries in Birmingham.	ANSWER: Peaky Blinders  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 3
In  this  city,  Shig  Murao  [[myuh-RAO]]  was  arrested  for  selling  an  "obscene"  book written by a local author, but Judge Clayton Horn ruled that Howl was protected by the First Amendment.  This  city's  Beyond  Shelter  anti-drugs  program  was  created  by  its  mayor,  Art Agnos,  and  Lawrence  Ferlinghetti  co-founded  this  city's  City  Lights  bookstore.  A  large Finnish community used to live in this city's Castro district, and this city was the location of the Summer of Love in its Haight [[HATE]]-Ashbury district. For ten points, name this city in northern California.	ANSWER: San Francisco
This man established rakuichi [[rah-koo-EE-chee]] open markets and rakuza guilds. Straw  dummy  troops  and  a  thunderstorm  helped  this  man  win  the  Battle  of  Okehazama [[oh-keh-hah-ZAH-mah]],  where  he  first  noticed  the  talents  of his  sandal-bearer,  who  later succeeded  him.  Akechi  Mitsuhide  [[ah-KEH-chee  mih-tsoo-HEE-deh]]  caught  this  man  in Kyoto and forced his suicide in the Honnō-ji  Incident.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Japanese daimyo  [[DIE-myoh]]  and  unifier  who  preceded  the  rule  of  Toyotomi Hideyoshi  [[toh-yoh- TOH-mee hih-deh-YOH-shee]].	ANSWER: Oda Nobunaga (accept either underlined portion)
Jean  McCormick  claimed  that  a  group  of  unsent  letters  this  person  wrote  proved that  she  was  this  person's  child.  A  rescue  of  Captain  Egan may  have led  to  the  best  known nickname given to this figure, who was said to have chased Jack McCall with a meat cleaver after McCall murdered an acquaintance. This woman was once employed as an assistant to a madam in Deadwood, where she had arrived as part of a wagon train including "Wild Bill" Hickok. For ten points, name this storyteller from Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show.	ANSWER: Calamity Jane (accept Martha Jane Cannary)
A party that has called for a parliamentary system in this country is the Democratic Patriots'  Movement.  The  death  of  Chokri  Belaid  [[beh-lah-EED]]  in  this  country  led  to accusations  that  the  perpetrators  were  linked  to  the  Ennahda  Movement.  In  2015,  twenty tourists were killed in a terrorist attack on this country’s Bardo National Museum. Zine [[ZEE-neh]]  El  Abidine  [[ah-bih-DEE-neh]]  Ben  Ali  was  ousted  as  leader  of  this  country following  protests  that  began  after  a  street  vendor  set  himself  on  fire  in  2011.  The  Arab Spring began in, for ten points, what North African country?	ANSWER: Republic of Tunisia (accept al-Jumhūrīyah at-Tūnisīyah)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 3
It's  not  fish,  but  the  Matafère  [[mah-tah-FEHR]]  Tower  was  constructed  to  protect workers  who  collected  this  good.  False  bottoms  known  as faux  culls were  often  worn  by women  who  smuggled  this  good,  a crime  punishable  by  up  to  ten  years  on  a  galley.  This good  was  collected  in  provincial  granaries  before  it  was  sold  with  a  tax  known  as  the gabelle. Faux  saunage [[foh  soh-NAWZH]]  involved  the  fraudulent  upselling  of,  for  ten points, what food preservative often found in mines and seawater?	ANSWER: Salt (accept Sodium Chloride)
George  Crawford  was  appointed  Secretary  of  War  by  this  president,  but  later resigned due to the Galphin Affair. The State of Deseret was founded during the presidency of this man who had defeated Democrat Lewis Cass. Many historians believe that bad water from the Washington sewers caused this man’s death by cholera. For his victories during the Second Seminole War, this man earned the nickname “Old Rough and Ready.” For ten points, name this twelfth U.S. president, who was elected in 1848.	ANSWER: Zachary Taylor   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 3
This man needed Archibald Roane to cast the tiebreaking vote to defeat John Sevier for commander of the Tennessee militia. A Scottish merchant and a marine who served under Edward Nicolls were the subject of a trial overseen by this man. This man defeated the forces of Menawa at a decisive defeat for the Red Stick Confederacy. That battle paved the way for this man’s capture of Pensacola. For ten points, name this American general in the War of 1812 and future U.S. president.	ANSWER: AndrewJackson
These institutions were the object of efforts to preserve traditional mores through the Falloux Laws which extended the Guizot Laws. Leo Collard reversed many reforms made to private institutions of this type by Pierre Hamel’s Christian Social Party. Belgium underwent two political “wars” named after these institutions. These institutions were secularized through laicite by Jules Ferry in a series of 1880s laws. For ten points, name these institutions from which Catholic curricula were phased out.	ANSWER:Schools (accept Catholicschools)
In this area, Roland Burris cited pollution concerns when he sued a gun club founded by men like Oscar  Mayer  and  Philip  Wrigley.  During  a  1968  trial,  Abbie  Hoffman  claimed  that  it  would  have  been better if protests had been allowed in this area ten miles away from a Democratic Nominating Convention. Found  in  its  city’s  North  Side  along  Lake  Michigan,  for  ten  points,  name  this  largest  public  park  in Chicago, named for a president buried some 200 miles to its southwest.	ANSWER:LincolnPark
This man appointed William Mann to head a division named for the inclusion of members from many states. This creator of the Rainbow Division spoke of the “fulfillment... of [his] boyish hopes and dreams” in a speech describing a group of people who “just fade away.” This man gave the “Old Soldiers Never Die” speech 19 years after he defeated the Bonus Army. Relieved by Truman during the Korean War, this is, for ten points, what five-star general who led the Allied war effort in the Pacific?	ANSWER: DouglasMacArthur
After this company was accused of violating the Sherman Act in 1969, it spent 13 years locked in the longest antitrust suit in history. A future CEO of this company claimed “we get paid for working with our heads,” inspiring this company’s motto “THINK.” This company’s largest research facility is named for  its  first  CEO  Thomas  Watson,  who  also  names  this  company’s  A.I.  system  that  was  victorious  on Jeopardy! For ten points, name this technology company nicknamed “Big Blue.”	ANSWER:IBM(acceptInternational Business MachinesCorporation) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 3
The  Grey  Wolves  bombed  the  Erawan  Shrine  after  people  of  this  ethnicity  were  deported  from Thailand. Rebiya Khan was accused of leading these people in a 2009 riot which was sparked by allegations that men of this ethnicity raped two women. The Republic of East Turkestan is a proposed independent state  for  these  people,  who  mostly  live  in  a  province  governed  from  Urumqi.  For  ten  points,  name  this minority who live in the Xinjiang Autonomous Region of China.	ANSWER:Uyghurs [WEE-goorz]
An  attempted  assassination  of  this  man  while  at  56  Hope  Road  is  explored  in  A  Brief  History  of Seven  Killings  by  Marlon  James.  This  musician  joined  People’s  National  Party  leader  Michael  Manley and Manley’s political rival Edward Seaga at a 1978 Peace Concert. As a symbol of black resistance, this singer wrote a song about Black U.S. cavalry regiments titled “Buffalo Soldier.” Bunny Wailer and Peter Tosh were bandmates of, for ten points, what Reggae artist of “One Love”?	ANSWER: BobMarley
A  black  woman  gave  this  man  a  bouquet  of  flowers  which  he  accepted  while  speaking  at  the Independent  Order  of  Pole-Bearers  Association.  This  man’s  most  decisive  victory  came  against  Samuel Sturgis at the Battle of Brice’s Crossroads. Lionel Booth’s interracial forces were massacred by this man at  Fort  Pillow.  An  organization  founded  by  this  man  in  Pulaski,  Tennessee  in  1868  named  him  Grand Wizard. For ten points, name this Confederate Civil War general who founded the Ku Klux Klan.	ANSWER: Nathan BedfordForrest
A Fluxus artist from this country prompted audience members to cut away her clothing with scissors in Cut Piece. Many Infinity Rooms have been made by a polka dot-loving artist from this country. Annie Leibovitz photographed a performance artist from this country naked next to her husband hours before his assassination in 1980. For ten points, name this home country of Yayoi Kusama and the wife of John Lennon, Yoko Ono.	ANSWER:Japan
This king married a woman who had earlier been married to a knight named John Grey of Groby, who  died  at  the  Second  Battle  of  St.  Albans.  Two  of  this  man’s  sons  died  mysterious  deaths  during the  reign  of  his  brother  and  became  known  as  the  Princes  in  the  Tower.  This  husband  of  Elizabeth  of Woodville defeated Henry VI at the Battle of Tewkesbury, bringing an end to the House of Lancaster. For ten points, name this king of the House of York, the elder brother of Richard III.	ANSWER:Edward IV Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 3
One man in this family was exiled to Venice after his city’s failure to conquer Lucca and later exiled the Albizzi and Strozzi families on his return. Archbishop Francesco Salviati was executed for his role in one plot against a member of this family, which resulted in the death of Giulano, the Pazzi Conspiracy. That member of this family patronized Botticelli and was known as the Magnificent. Cosimo and Lorenzo were from, for ten points, what Florentine banking family?	ANSWER: de Medici
This  location  may  have  been  inadvertently  burned  by  a  shepherd  who  was  chasing  after  his  sheep by torchlight. 100 rivers of flowing mercury were recreated in this location according to Sima Qian. This location was modeled upon the capital of Xianyang and housed inside a pyramid-shaped mound in Lintong Province. Thousands of uniquely sculpted soldiers were placed in this location to aid the emperor in the afterlife. For ten points, identify this tomb complex near Xian where the Terracotta Army was placed.	ANSWER: mausoleumofQinShihuangdi  (acceptnecropolisofQinShihuangdi  or  tomb  before mention)
Because Arthur Chilson and two associates sailed to Africa in 1902 to establish this religion, Kenya today has the most members of this religion. The acronym “SPICES” is used to remember principles in this religion. Members of this religion attend business gatherings called Yearly Meetings. Members of this religion believe in God as one’s “inner light.” For ten points, name this religion, founded by George Fox and practiced by Richard Nixon, Mary Dyer, and William Penn.	ANSWER: Religious Society of Friends(acceptQuakers)
During this man’s governorship, James Rector was killed during “Bloody Thursday” at People’s Park. Though  supposedly  pro-life,  this  man  signed  a  “Therapeutic  Abortion  Act”  resulting  in  over  2  million abortions in his state. The Black Panthers protested this man’s signing of the Mulford Act, and he was succeeded  by  Jerry  Brown’s  first  term.  For  10  points,  name  this  Republican  governor  of  California  and former actor who later defeated Jimmy Carter for President in 1980.	ANSWER: Ronald Reagan
This  non-Asian  country’s  “Emergency”  in  the  1950s  led  to  the  signing  of  the  London-Z ̈urich Agreements. This country was the subject of the failed 2004 Annan Plan. This country was invaded in Operation  Attila  after  a  successful  coup  led  by  EOKA-B.  This  country  is  divided  by  the  Green  Line and  split  over  the  cause  ofenosis,  or  unification  with  Greece.  For  10  points,  name  this  3rd-largest Mediterranean island split between a Turkish northern half and a Greek southern half.	ANSWER: Cyprus Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
After  beating  Red  Star  Belgrade  in  the  1958  European  Cup  quarterfinals,  this  team  suffered  11 casualties in a plane crash in Munich; survivors included Ray Wood, Bobby Charlton, and manager Matt Busby. A memorial to the Munich disaster is on display at this team’s home stadium, Old Trafford, where one of its stands is named for legendary manager Sir Alex Ferguson. For ten points, name this English football club whose 13 titles are the most in Premier League history.	ANSWER: ManchesterUnitedFootball Club (prompt on “Man U”; prompt on “Manchester;” prompt on “United”)
This event was investigated by Thomas Walsh after John McKendrick was tipped-off. A court case stemming from this event granted Congress the power to compel testimony.McGrain v. Daughertygrew out of this event during which Albert Fall became the first Cabinet member to be sent to jail. The leasing of Elk Hills in exchange for bribes was central to, for ten points, what oil scandal that rocked Warren G. Harding’s presidency?	ANSWER: TeapotDome
Troops on this campaign stopped to aid Alfonso I in the capture of Moorish Lisbon, their only success in  this  campaign.  This  campaign  culminated  in  a  slaughter  at  a  vineyard  outside  Damascus.  Manuel Komnenos was accused of colluding with the Seljuk Turks against this campaign’s leaders, Louis VII and Conrad  III.  After  the  County  of  Edessa  fell  to  Zengi,  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  recruited  soldiers  for  this campaign. For ten points, name this 1147 campaign called by Pope Eugene III.	ANSWER: SecondCrusade
Racial covenants on housing were found unconstitutional in a case originating in this city,Shelley v. Kraemer. The Eads Bridge in this city was the first bridge across the Mississippi south of the Missouri. This former location of the Pruitt-Igoe public housing projects is home to a weighted catenary designed by Eero Saarinen symbolizing its connection to the American West. For 10 points, name this Midwestern city home to the Gateway Arch.	ANSWER: St.Louis
This man’s aide, John Armstrong, was caught attempting to lead a military coup in the Newburgh Conspiracy. The Baron de Kalb died while under the command of this man as part of the disastrous Battle of Camden. The Conway Cabal aimed to replace George Washington with this man. This man claimed credit  for  defending  the  Bemis  Heights  from  John  Burgoyne  which  led  to  resentment  from  Benedict Arnold. For ten points, name this man who commanded American forces at Saratoga.	ANSWER: Horatio Gates Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 3
This body of water was the destination of Zachariah Gillam’s shipNonsuch. Henry Green and Robert Juet led a mutiny in this body of water, casting the captain of theDiscoveryand his son adrift to their death.  The  area  around  this  body  of  water  was  once  called  Rupert’s  Land.  A  company  named  for  this body of water controlled the fur trade in colonial-era Canada. For ten points, name this Canadian body of water named for the British explorer Henry.	ANSWER: HudsonBay
At his villa in Samoussy, Carloman is said to have died either of natural causes or of a particularly bad instance of this phenomenon, possibly the result of poisoned tea. Another death of this type may have been the result of uncharacteristically heavy drinking while planning to sack Constantinople; that 453 AD event occurred while its victim was with Ildico on his wedding night. For ten points, name this condition that is said to have killed Attila the Hun.	ANSWER: nosebleeds (acceptepistaxis; acceptchokingonblood; prompt on choking)
Description  acceptable.  One  of  these  time  periods  featured  the  use  of  Horizontal  and  Vertical Alliances. An attempt to kill Liu Bang during a sword dance took place during another of these periods, which eventually ended when the Chu lost. The Yellow Turban revolt began one of these periods, whose occurrence often indicated that the Mandate of Heaven had been withdrawn. Confucius lived during one of these periods, which included the Spring and Autumn and Warring States ones. For ten points, name these time periods exemplified by one between the fall of the Qin [chin] and the rise of the Han.	ANSWER:Inter-dynastyPeriodsinChina(accept anything referring to the periods of timebetween Chinesedynasties,  prompting  on  partial  answers;  acceptWarringStatesperiod;  acceptChu-Han Contentionafter “Liu Bang” is read; prompt on generic descriptions of civil conflict in China)
A 1999 biography of this man by Dava Sobel concerns his relationship with his daughter, whom he sent to a convent. This man outlined his mathematical methods inThe Assayer, which wrongly disputed the nature of comets. In another work by this man, Simplicio represents the church in a heretical book that  was  banned  in  1633.Dialogue  Concerning  the  Two  Chief  World  Systemswas  written  by,  for  ten points, what Italian scientist who was brought before the Inquisition for supporting heliocentrism?	ANSWER: GalileoGalilei(accept either or both names)
This politician secretly profited as a co-founder of the Win or Lose oil company, and largely was able to control the governor of his state, Oscar K. Allen. Dentist Carl Weiss murdered this man, who proposed a net wealth tax to fund redistribution of resources in a plan whose vision was “every man a king.” The “Share Our Wealth” program was touted by, for ten points, what fiery Depression-era Louisiana senator nicknamed “Kingfish?”	ANSWER: Huey Pierce Long, Jr. Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
In the chapter “A Picture Contest,” an official tries to marry his daughter to a holder of this position by  ordering  fantastic  displays  of  artwork.  A  person  in  this  position  exiles  his  half-brother  to  the  coast when the man is caught in an embarrassing affair. A holder of this position becomes blind after having obsessive dreams of his father. Kiritsubo, Suzaku, and Reizei all hold this position in a Heian period novel by Murasaki Shikibu. For ten points, Genji serves as an official in the court of what type of leader?	ANSWER: emperorofJapan(prompt on partial answers, like “emperor” or “leader of Japan;” do not accept shogun or other terms)
An  artwork  comprised  of  these  objects  shows  four  white  squares  and  a  white  tree  on  a  purple background.  A  term  for  these  objects  provides  the  alternate  name  for  the  Tawagonshi  Treaty.  Sets  of these objects were used to convey rank and station within the Iroquois Confederacy, and they comprise the  Hiawatha  Belt.  A  popular  legend  holds  that  Peter  Minuit  bought  the  island  of  Manhattan  with  24 dollars worth of these objects. Wampum are comprised of, for ten points, what objects made of shells and displayed on threads or strings?	ANSWER: beads (acceptwampumbefore mentioned; acceptshells before mentioned)
This island’s reconquest was led by the Hauteville family, whose Roger II elevated it to a kingdom. Pressing the claim of his wife Constance of Hohenstaufen, Peter III of Aragon was invited to conquer this island during its namesake Vespers. After the War of the Quadruple Alliance, the Habsburgs exchanged Sardinia for this island with Victor Amadeus II of Savoy. For ten points, name this island that Garibaldi’s Expedition of the Thousand unified with Italy.	ANSWER:Sicily
This man executed a plan developed by Thomas Maitland that he discovered at a Masonic Lodge. After returning from the Peninsular War, this soldier was wounded at the Battle of San Lorenzo; he later replaced Manuel Belgrano as commander of the Army of the North. With Bernardo O’Higgins, this leader guided his army in the Crossing of the Andes to victory at the Battle of Chacabuco. For ten points, name this Argentine general who liberated Argentina, Chile, and Peru from the Spanish, a colleague of Simon Bolivar.	ANSWER: Jos ́e (Francisco) de SanMart ́ıny Matorras
Diane  Rawlinson  invoked  a  BFOQ  defense  based  on  this  piece  of  legislation  during  a  court  case involving  the  “disparate  impact”  theory  of  one  of  its  components.  Richard  Russell  led  a  group  of  19 senators who opposed this bill, for which Everett Dirksen drafted a compromise 54 days into its filibuster. The EEOC was created in this bill’s Title 7. Members of the “Southern Bloc” opposed this bill, which was signed by Lyndon Johnson in the presence of Martin Luther King. For ten points, name this landmark anti-discrimination bill.	ANSWER:CivilRightsAct of 1964 (accept answers that use Act, Bill, and/or Law; prompt on partial answers) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 3
This organization deployed the ISAF shortly after the only time it has ever invoked Article 5. In March 2017, opposition leaders in Montenegro wrote to Steve Bannon to ask him to block Montenegro’s accession to this organization. Donald Trump has repeatedly complained that members of this organization are not spending 2 percent of their GDP on defense. For ten points, name this military alliance which consists of the United States, Canada and various European countries.	ANSWER: NorthAtlanticTreatyOrganization
This  city  is  sometimes  grouped  together  with  an  opposite  river  counterpart  named  after  the  Van Rensselaer family. A document named after this city inspired the later Galloway Plan. A political cartoon published in support of a plan named for this city depicts a snake in eight segments above the caption “Join or Die.” This city was the site of a 1754 political congress at which Benjamin Franklin proposed a namesake plan of union. For ten points, name this capital city of New York.	ANSWER: Albany(acceptAlbanyPlan; acceptAlbanyCongress)
Over 100 civilians died during Operation Carthage in one of these buildings in Copenhagen when it was  struck  by  RAF  bombers  as  collateral.  One  of  these  institutions  served  as  the  headquarters  for  the White Rose anti-Nazi movement in Munich, and another of these institutions was transformed into the S-21 prison camp by the Khmer Rouge. A sacred olive grove dedicated to Athena surrounded an ancient example of one of these institutions founded by Plato. For ten points, name these institutions that include the Lyceum and Plato’s Academy.	ANSWER: schools (acceptboardingschools,universities, etc.)
This composer wrote aMissa Solemnismass for Archduke Randolph, his patron. He commemorated the Battle of Vitoria with the pieceWellington’s Victoryand donated its funds to victims of the Peninsular War.  This  composer  allegedly  dedicated  a  piece  to  Napoleon  until  the  decision  to  establish  an  empire prompted  this  man  to  rip  that  piece  in  half  and  dedicate  it  to  “the  memory  of  a  great  man.”  For  ten points, name this composer of theEmperorpiano concerto and theEroicasymphony.	ANSWER: Ludwig van Beethoven
Though this general was pushed back to Gazala during Operation Crusader, he managed to capture Tobruk from Claude Auchinleck shortly after. This man’s strategy of setting wooden poles to block glider landings led the logs to become known as this man’s “asparagus.” This man was put in charge of defending the  Atlantic  Wall  during  D-Day  two  years  after  he  lost  to  Bernard  Montgomery  at  the  First  Battle  of El Alamein. For ten points, name this German general whose North African campaigns earned him the nickname “Desert Fox.”	ANSWER: Erwin Rommel Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 3
The sociologist Phil Zuckerman primarily studies societies where this belief is prevalent. John Lennox debated  a  writer  holding  this  philosophical  position  in  2008.  Baron  d’Holbach’s  18th-century  bookThe System  of  Naturewas  widely  criticized  for  holding  this  belief.  Another  advocate  for  this  philosophical position argued against its alternative in 1986’sThe Blind Watchmaker. Christopher Hitchens and Richard Dawkins  are  among  the  “Four  Horsemen”  of,  for  ten  points,  what  philosophical  stance  that  rejects  the existence of God?	ANSWER: atheism(accept descriptions ofbelievingthereisnoGod; do not accept or prompt on agnosticism or descriptions of “questioning whether there is a God”)
This location was the subject of a 2007 controversy when John Fire Lame Deer symbolically planted a prayer staff into the ground. Doane Robinson initially intended for Lewis and Clark to be honored at this site. To work on this project, its sculptor abandoned a relief honoring Jefferson Davis and Stonewall Jackson at Stone Mountain. Gutzon Borglum designed, for ten points, what South Dakota landmark that features the faces of Washington, Lincoln, Roosevelt, and Jefferson?	ANSWER: MountRushmore
This figure met an illegitimate Byzantine princess named Bayalan while visiting an Uzbek ruler. This figure  was  employed  as  a  judge  by  both  the  ruler  of  the  Maldives  and  the  Sultan  of  Delhi.  This  man criticized the women of Mali for not covering themselves and documented his expedition to China in his Travels, which began after his first pilgrimage to Mecca. For ten points, name this Moroccan traveler that crossed much of the medieval Islamic world.	ANSWER: Abu Abdallah MuhammadIbnBattuta
Different ways to do this activity are listed in a “Rag” written by Phil Ochs. David Harris founded an organization that advocated for this action and was symbolized by the letter omega, for ohm. Common methods of doing this included wearing women’s underwear to feign homosexuality, one of a number of ways  to  get  4-F  status.  One  of  Jimmy  Carter’s  first  acts  as  president  was  pardoning  people  who  had performed, for ten points, what action by which people avoided fighting in the Vietnam War?	ANSWER: draftdodgingthe Vietnam War (accept synonyms for dodge, includingdraftevasionand draftavoidance; accept equivalents such asavoidingmilitaryservice in Vietnam; prompt on resisting the draft and/or protesting the Vietnam War)
During a power struggle, this man stabbed his former ally, John Comyn, at a monastery in Dumfries. This man’s claim to the throne was defended in a letter to Pope John XXII in the Declaration of Arbroath. This  man’s  Treaty  of  Corbeil  renewed  the  Auld  Alliance  with  France,  and  he  assumed  the  position  of Guardian after the defeat at Falkirk of William Wallace. For ten points, name this Scottish king who was defeated the English at the Battle of Bannockburn.	ANSWER: RoberttheBruce Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 3
The timetable of this event had to be hurried after the central figure announced his plans to invade Parthia, and it began with a petition to recall the brother of Lucius Tillius Cimber. A series of bad dreams led  Calpurnia  to  nearly  prevent  this  event,  which  was  organized  by  two  men  immortalized  in  Dante’s ninth circle of Hell, Cassius and Brutus. For ten points, name this event that took place in 44 BC on the Ides of March and resulted in the death of a Roman dictator.	ANSWER: assassinationofGaius JuliusCaesar
CNN refused to adopt Jim Cisco’s Halloween-inspired nickname for one of these events. According to legend, two dozen people died while partying in the Richelieu Apartments during one of these events in 1969; that event cut Mississippi’s Ship Island into two halves. In the aftermath of one of these events, Michael Brown was told “you’re doing a heck of a job,” in spite of heavy criticism of FEMA’s poor relief efforts.  For  ten  points,  name  these  natural  disasters  whose  names,  like  Camille  and  Katrina,  are  often retired when they cause severe damage.	ANSWER: hurricanes
This modern-day country’s intelligentsia were purged in Operation Searchlight. One politician from this country called for “every house to turn into a fortress” after an electoral victory by the Awami League. This  country’s  independence  was  guaranteed  as  part  of  the  Simla  Agreement.  In  2013,  the  deadliest collapse due to structural failure occurred in this country after the collapse of the Rana Plaza. For ten points, name this country formerly known as East Pakistan, whose capital is Dhaka.	ANSWER: Bangladesh
This city is home to an oak tree whose destruction was prevented by the Tercio of Bego ̃na. One event in this city took place on a Monday, its traditional market day, which increased casualty counts. George Steer wrote a report about the destruction of this city, which was carried out by Hugo Sperrle’s Aviazione Legionaria. Operation Rugen targeted, for ten points, what Basque city whose bombing by the Condor Legion during the Spanish Civil War inspired a massive Pablo Picasso painting?	ANSWER: Guernica
This man’s subjects imposed the “Charter of Privileges” while this man was away in England, and he lost most of his territory to Philip Ford. This man wrote the bookNo Cross, No Crownwhile imprisoned in the Tower of London. New Castle was the capital of one his territories, which he almost named “New Wales” until the intervention of the king. James II granted Delaware to this man, who was also granted a colony named for his family by Charles II in exchange for a fifth of all gold and silver. For ten points, name this man who founded a religious haven for Quakers.	ANSWER: William Penn Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 3
Blue  amulets  with  this  shape  are  callednazars,  and  a  document  written  by  a  “beloved  of  Ninni” describes  damage  done  to  these  objects  by  a  physician  operating  on  a  tumor.  A  destructive  one  of these  objects  was  possessed  by  the  Fomorian  Balor.  The  Byzantines  supposedly  damaged  these  objects belonging to Enrico Dandolo, who lost the use of these body parts over time. For ten points, name this body part, often quoted in descriptions of lex talionis from Hammurabi’s code and which can be affected by cataracts.	ANSWER: eye(accept evileye)
Erawan Shrine is located in this city, whose temple of Wrat Pha Kaew houses the Emerald Buddha. This city was first founded as a trading post of the Ayyuthaya kingdom, though it has grown to include modern day attractions like the Patpong district and Khaosan Road. Located in the Chao Phraya River delta, this city was rocked in 2015 when bombs exploded at the Siam Paragon mall and nearby religious shrines. King Rama IX Park is located in, for ten points, what capital city of Thailand?	ANSWER: Bangkok
Unity College in Maine currently owns and uses a set of solar panels that this building had installed in the 1970s. For “exercise and amusement” at this location, a billiards table was controversially purchased for $61 in 1825. In 2011, a resident of this location started homebrewing a Honey Ale, using honey from beehives on the South Lawn. After learning that they would move to this location, Malia and Sasha got a new dog, Bo. For ten points, name this residence at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue whose occupants have included Jimmy Carter and Barack Obama.	ANSWER:WhiteHouse
Upon the declaration of this war, Ohio congressman Joshua Giddings wrote an open letter  to  the  president  outlining  how  this  war  was  against  an  "unoffending  people"  and  a thinly veiled attempt to "safeguard slavery." One president was angry at a peace negotiator in  this  war  for  forgoing  the  acquisition  of  Baja  California  for  fifteen  million  dollars  in reparations  from  the  government  of  Santa  Anna.  Nicholas  Trist  and  future  president  José Joaquín de Herrera negotiated an end to, for ten points, what North American war, ended by the treaty of Guadeloupe Hidalgo?	ANSWER: Mexican-American War (or Intervención estadounidense en México)
Nancy   Pelosi   tried   to   invoke   a   little-known   section   of   this   amendment   that disqualifies people for office on the basis of insurrection. Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote that this amendment “does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer’s Social Statics” in the case Lochner v. New York. It's not the Fifth Amendment, but this amendment’s Due Process Clause was used to  apply  the  Bill  of  Rights  to  states. Griswold  v.  Connecticut held  that  this  amendment established a “right to privacy." For ten points, name this Constitutional amendment that established the Equal Protection Clause.	ANSWER: Fourteenth Amendment
During this event, a "naval quarantine" by the UN, enforced by the cruisers Essex and Gearing,  failed  to  apprehend  the Bucharest.  In  the  wake  of  this  event,  a  teletype  was established   between   the   Kremlin   and   the   White   House   to   have   a   direct   line   of communication. In an effort to end this conflict, an agreement to remove ballistic weapons from Greece and Turkey was drawn up. An attempt to place warheads on the title Caribbean island  led  to,  for  ten  points,  what  1962  "crisis"  between  the  Khrushchev  regime  and the Kennedy administration?	ANSWER: Cuban Missile Crisis
This  man  siphoned  money  to  his  family  through  a  tax  by  which  the  ultra-wealthy were  forced  to  donate  to  the  Dana  Sejahtera  [[seh-jah-TEH-rah]]  Mandiri  fund.  This  man's ally,  Ali  Murtopo,  incited riots  to  coincide  with  a  visit  by  Japanese  prime  minister  Kakuei Tanaka to discredit his rival Sumitro. The "Supersemar" Edict gave this general the right to restore  order  following  a  mid-1960s  "Communist  Purge"  at  the  behest  of  his  superior, Sukarno.  The 1998  Riots  in  Jakarta  led  to  the  downfall  of,  for  ten  points,  which  dictator's "New Order" regime in Indonesia?	ANSWER: Suharto  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 5
One   hoax   involving   this   event   was   the   made-up  shooting  of  Martin  Šmíd [[SHMEED]]  by  police.  Protesters  during  this  event  jingled  keys  to  signify  the  unlocking  of doors when Miloš Jakeš [[MEE-lohsh YAH-kehsh]] resigned as General Secretary. This event began  on  International  Students'  Day  and  ended  when  Gustáv  Husák  resigned  and  was replaced  with  the  leader  of  the  Charter  77  movement,  Václav  Havel.  For  ten  points,  name this   revolution   in   1989   that   culminated   with   the   ending   of   Communist   rule   in Czechoslovakia.	ANSWER: Velvet Revolution (or Gentle Revolution; or Sametová revoluce; or Nežná revolúcia)
In April 2021, this person promulgated support for a global minimum corporate tax rate. This economist postulated that paying workers more than their market value in wages increases productivity in the paper, The Fair-Wage Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment that she  co-wrote  with  her  husband,  George  Akerlof.  In  2018,  Donald  Trump  replaced  this person  in  one  position  with  Jerome  Powell.  For  ten  points,  name  this  economist,  the  first female Chair of the Federal Reserve and the first female Secretary of the Treasury.	ANSWER: Janet Yellen (or Janet Louise Yellen)
While  representing  this  state,  Nonpartisan  League  leader  Lynn  Frazier  became  the first  state  governor  to  be  recalled  from  office.  Another  governor  of  this  state,  "Wild  Bill" Langer, was convicted of defrauding the federal government by ordering state employees to donate  to  his  party.  When  signing  the  papers  to  approve  this  state's  statehood,  James  G. Blaine shuffled the papers with those of this state's southern neighbor. For ten points, name this Great Plains state, whose city of West Fargo hosts a recreational Old West town called Bonanzaville, USA.	ANSWER: North Dakota
A  copy  of  this  painting  was  covered  by  a  blue  curtain  during  a  Colin  Powell  press conference  at  the  United  Nations.  45  studies  of  this  painting  throughout  its  creation  were photographed by the artist's wife, Dora Maar. Dagger-like tongues appear in the mouths of a screaming horse and a mother with her dead child in this painting, which was defaced with the  anti-Vietnam  War  message  "KILL  LIES  ALL."  Created following  the  destruction  of  a Basque  town,  for  ten  points,  what  Pablo  Picasso  painting  is  set  during  the  Spanish  Civil War?	ANSWER: Guernica  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 5
This  author  wrote  essays  on  subjects  like  the  "Glory  Days  of  Medora"  and  "The American  Adventure  of  Louis  Agassiz"  in  his  collection Brave  Companions.  This  writer gained fame for his 1968 chronicle of the Johnstown Flood. An illustrated edition of a book by  this  man  includes  a  recreation  of  a  letter  that  George  Washington  penned  to  Martha about  his  commission.  That  book,  a  companion  to  his  earlier  biography  of  John  Adams, focuses  on  the  events  at  the  start  of  the  American  Revolution.  For  ten  points,  name  this historian who wrote 1776.	ANSWER: David McCullough (or David Gaub McCullough)
One building at a university in this city features thirty-one distinct rooms themed to different  cultures.  The  Nationality  Rooms  are  located  in  an  art-deco  skyscraper  in  this  city that was dubbed "an inverted mineshaft" by Frank Lloyd Wright. The Cathedral of Learning is located in this city whose Heinz Field replaced Three Rivers Stadium as the home for an NFL  team  in  2001.  In  this  city's  Frick  Park,  the  Fern  Hollow  Bridge  collapsed  in  January 2022. For ten points, name this city whose football team, the Steelers, reflects its industrial history.	ANSWER: Pittsburgh (accept University of Pittsburgh; accept Pittsburgh Steelers; prompt on "Pitt")   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 5
The  Committee  of  Five,  or  Petka,  led  this  country,  and  before  World  War  Two, Carpathian  Ruthenia  was  part  of  this  nation,  which  allied  with  Yugoslavia  and  Romania  in the  Little  Entente.  Thomas  Masaryk  helped  create  this country  whose  soldiers  fought  in  a Legion along the Trans-Siberian Railway. Edvard Beneš [[BEH-nesh]] led this country when the  Sudetenland  [[soo-DEH-ten-lahnd]]  was  annexed  after  the  Munich  Agreement.  For  ten points, name this former Central European country whose western portion was turned into a protectorate by Nazi Germany during World War Two.	ANSWER: Czechoslovakia (or Československo; do not accept or prompt on "Czech Republic," "Slovak Republic," or "Slovakia")
In this state, a Loyalist mistook Henry Lee for Banastre [[BAH-nah-ster]] Tarleton in an engagement known as Pyle’s Hacking Match. A horse was shot from under General Charles Cornwallis during a battle in this state which inspired the quote, “Another such victory  will  ruin  the  British  army.” That pyrrhic victory for the British was fought in this state at Guilford Court House, near modern-day Greensboro. For ten points, name this state whose capital was named for Sir Walter Raleigh.	ANSWER: North Carolina
One   work   by   this   composer,   focusing   on   the   dedication   of   a   theatre   in   Pest [[PESHT]],  laments  the  Ottoman  conquest  of  Athens.  Another  work  by  this  composer commemorates  the  result  of  the  Battle  of  Vitoria,  a  defeat  for  Joseph  Bonaparte.  This composer  of Wellington’s Victory changed  the  original  dedication  of  a  work containing a  C- minor funeral march from one specific ruler to a generic “great man.” Napoleon was the original dedicatee of the “Eroica” Symphony by, for ten points, what composer of Für Elise?	ANSWER: Ludwig van Beethoven
A  hymn  written  in  favor  of  the  "Gathering"  of  these  groups  was  written  by  George Loveless, one of the Tolpuddle Martyrs. The Webb siblings wrote a history of these groups, including  their  "New  Model"  form.  Many  of  these  groups  signed  the  Warwick  Agreement, allying  with  the  Labour  party.  In  1871,  these  groups  were  legalized  under  Lord  Derby's ministry, but these groups were previously banned under the Combination Acts. Organizing the 1926 General Strike, for ten points, what are these groups which represent laborers?	ANSWER: Trade Unions in the United Kingdom (or Labor Unions)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 4
This company’s main product may have been inspired by the French beverage Vin Mariani  [[mah-ree-AH-nee]].  During  Asa  Candler's  time  leading  this  company,  it  began bottling operations in Chattanooga. Despite positive taste tests, this company's 1985 "New" version  of  its  flagship  product  was  highly  criticized.  This  company,  which  was  founded  by John  Pemberton,  launched  its  most  popular  drink  during  Prohibition  in  Georgia.  For  ten points, name this soft drink company, known for its rivalry with Pepsi.	ANSWER: The Coca-Cola Company (accept Coke)
In  2019,  this  series  was  remade  for  French  television  under  the  title Mouche [[MOOSH]].   This   television   show   was   adapted   from   a   2013   one-woman   play   at   the Edinburgh Fringe Festival. Enola Holmes director Harry Bradbeer directed every episode of this series other than the pilot, in which the protagonist steals a sculpture of a woman’s torso  from her stepmother  after  being  denied  a  loan  for her failing  café.  The  winner of  the 2019 Primetime Emmy for Outstanding Comedy Series, for ten points, what is this television show starring Phoebe Waller-Bridge?	ANSWER: Fleabag
When  the  Sociedad  de  Beneficencia  [[soh-cee-eh-DAHD  deh  beh-neh-fee-SEN-see- ah]] did not offer this person its presidency, she started a charitable foundation in her own name.  A  city  built  by  that  foundation  was  temporarily  renamed  Ciudad  General  Belgrano following the "Liberating Revolution" that removed this woman’s husband from power. The title “Spiritual Leader of the Nation” was given to, for ten points, what suffragette and supporter of the descamisados, whose life story was depicted in a namesake Andrew Lloyd Webber musical?	ANSWER: Eva Perón (accept Evita Perón; prompt on "Evita")
This   man,   born   in   Lower   Silesia,   began   his   military   career   as   a   cavalry reconnaissance officer. The identity of this man's killer has been debated for decades, with suspects including  Cedric  Popkin's  anti-aircraft gun  and  flying  ace  Arthur  Roy  Brown.  This soldier commanded Jasta 11 [[YAH-stuh ELF]] as part of the larger "Flying Circus" unit. For ten  points,  name  this  colorfully-nicknamed  ace  German  fighter  pilot  credited  with  80  air combat victories in World War One.	ANSWER: The Red Baron (or Manfred Albrecht Freiherr von Richthofen; or Baron von Richthofen)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 4
In  2000,  John  Poulos  and  James  Hoover  founded  this  company  in  Canada.  Sidney Powell claimed to have evidence from a Venezuelan military official proving this company’s products were defective. Mike Lindell of My Pillow was the subject of a defamation lawsuit from  this  company,  whose  central  products  have  cumulative  and  ranked-choice  options. Potential tampering with this company's products in Wisconsin and Georgia partly led to a hand  recount  during  the  2020  presidential  election.  For  ten  points,  name  this  company which makes electronic voting equipment.	ANSWER: Dominion Voting Systems Corporation
This president defended Elizabeth Jennings Graham in a court case that helped pave the  way for  the  desegregation  of  streetcars  in  his  home  state.  The New York World wrote that during this man's time in office, “no duty was neglected in his administration, and no adventurous  project  alarmed  the  nation."  This  president  signed  into  effect  the  Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act after Charles Guiteau assassinated his predecessor. For ten points, name this 21st president and successor to James Garfield.	ANSWER: Chester Alan Arthur   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 4
A  former  member  of  the  Connecticut  General  Assembly  stumbled  across  a  river  in  this  state  in 1796,  finding  a  site  to  found  a  city  along  it.  That  river  in  this  state  was  described  as  a  body  that “oozes  rather  than  flows”  by  TIME  magazine  after  an  incident  that  helped  lead  to  the  creation  of  its state’s Environmental Protection Agency. For ten points, name this state, the first state created from the Northwest Territory and the site of a 1969 fire on the Cuyahoga River.	ANSWER:Ohio
This  event  was  nationally  confirmed  by  the  Decree  of  16  Pluviose  after  a  delegation  including Jean-Baptiste  Belley  arrived  in  the  National  Assembly.  Leger-Felicite  Sonthonax  proclaimed  this  event hoping  to  gain  allies,  although  it  failed  to  immediately  sway  Toussaint  Louverture.  Reinstated  in  1848 after being undone by Napoleon in 1802, for ten points, what is this event that began in the colony of Saint-Domingue?	ANSWER:AbolitioninFrance(accept answers indicating the ending of slavery inFrance)
This character disguises himself using Erpingham’s cloak before exchanging gloves with the soldier Michael Williams. At the siege of Harfleur, this man delivers a speech that begins “once more unto the breach dear friends.” This king claims that “if it be a sin to covet honour, / [he is] the most offending soul alive” as he addresses a “band of brothers” on St. Crispin’s Day. For ten points, name this Shakespearean king who wins the Battle of Agincourt.	ANSWER:Henry V(acceptHenry of Monmouth)
During this election year, the winning party held its convention at the Chicago “Wigwam.” At the losing  party’s  convention  in  Baltimore  in  this  year,  many  “Fire-Eaters”  expressed  disapproval  with  the party platform. John Bell’s Constitutional Union Party ran in this year, which also featured Vice-President John Breckinridge among two Democratic nominees from the North and South. For ten points, name this presidential election year in which Abraham Lincoln won his first term.	ANSWER:1860
This battle is commemorated by a memorial complex on the heights of Mamayev Kurgan including the  grave  of  Marshal  Vasily  Chuikov.  A  statue  designed  by  Yevgeny  Vuchetich  is  part  of  that  complex and depicts a woman holding a sword. Asger Jorn’s painting of this battle shows soldiers of the German Sixth Army covered in snow. For ten points, name this battle, commemorated by the 85-meter tall The Motherland Calls, the decisive Eastern Front battle of World War Two.	ANSWER: Battle ofStalingrad Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 4
The North Adams strike at a factory making these objects was broken up by Chinese strikebreakers in Boston. One incident involving this kind of object occurred after Filipino diplomat Lorenzo Sumulong criticized restrictions of human rights in Eastern Europe. Iraqi journalist Muntadhar al-Zaidi threw one of these at George W. Bush during a press conference. For ten points, name this type of object, one of which was banged against a podium by Nikita Khrushchev at the UN General Assembly.	ANSWER: Ashoe(accept equivalents)
One of this woman’s best known songs was written for a 1980 movie she starred in that highlights male chauvinism in the workplace. This woman’s philanthropic efforts include giving away more than 100 million  books  to  promote  literacy  as  well  as  supporting  AIDS  research.  This  musician  gained  attention in 2020 for donating one million dollars towards Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine research. For ten points, name this country singer-songwriter known for the song and movie “9 to 5.”	ANSWER: DollyParton
This city’s first major newspaper was founded during Reconstruction as the Democratic Statesman and was later renamed as the American-Statesman. Huston-Tillotson University was the first historically black  college  in  this  city.  Another  university  in  this  city  was  where  Charles  Whitman  opened  fire  on  a crowd from that university’s namesake tower. For ten points, name this city, where the University of Texas was founded.	ANSWER:Austin
This man claimed that he would have carried out a series of sniper attacks if the book Unintended Consequences was written a few years earlier. Charles Fortier was an associate of this man who distributed copies of the Turner Diaries at gun shows. Revenge for the ATF siege of the Branch Davidian compound in Waco, Texas was one of the key motivations of this man’s attack on the Alfred P. Murrah Building in 1995. For ten points, name this perpetrator of the Oklahoma City bombing.	ANSWER: TimothyMcVeigh
This  man  once  defined  fascism  as  “nothing  but  capitalist  reaction”  and  argued  that  a  state  of “permanent revolution” was better than a rival’s idea of “socialism in one country.” Seven years after his exile, this man published The Revolution Betrayed which analyzed the Soviet Union following the death of  Vladimir  Lenin.  This  man  served  as  military  commissar  during  the  Russian  Civil  War,  for  which  he created the Red Army. For ten points, name this Russian revolutionary opposed to Stalin.	ANSWER: LeonTrotsky Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 4
While deployed to Fort Bliss, this man’s wife and children tragically died in a fire in San Francisco. Charles Stanton, this man’s personal aide, recorded him as saying “Lafayette, we are here” during a visit to Lafayette’s tomb in Paris. This man was allowed to design his own insignia, choosing four gold stars, after being promoted to General of the Armies. For ten points, name this commander of the American Expeditionary Forces during World War I, a general nicknamed “Black Jack.”	ANSWER: John J. Pershing
This person created a polar area diagram divided into months, known as the “Rose” diagram. The run-down facilities at Selimiye prompted this person to work with Isambard Brunel to create Renkioi, a facility that lessened mortality rates by 90%. At this person’s request, Scutari hospital was investigated by  the  Sanitary  Commission.  This  person’s  treatment  of  wounded  soldiers  led  her  to  be  known  as  the “Lady with the Lamp.” For ten points, name this nurse active in the Crimean War.	ANSWER: Florence Nightingale
Manco  Yapanqui  failed  to  capture  this  city  after  a  ten-month  siege,  despite  possessing  over  two hundred thousand soldiers. This city’s Church of Santo Domingo was built atop the ruins of the Temple of the Sun after its destruction. One ruler was locked in this city’s “Ransom Room”after being ambushed at nearby Cajamarca by conquistadors. Atahualpa was strangled to death by Francisco Pizarro in, for ten points, what former capital city of the Incan Empire?	ANSWER: Cuzco(orQusquorQosqo)
A  science  fiction  author  from  this  country  depicted  an  invasion  of  aliens  known  as  Trisolarans  in his  “Remembrance  of  Earth’s  Past”  series.  One  author  from  this  country  found  inspiration  for  a  novel after  being  falsely  diagnosed  with  lung  cancer.  Novels  from  this  country  include  The  Republic  of  Wine and Soul Mountain. The Red Detachment of Women was one of the Eight Model Works of this country’s communist government. For ten points, name this country, home of Liu Cixin and Gao Xingjian.	ANSWER: People’s Republic of China(acceptPRC, acceptZhonghuaRenminGuo, do not prompt on or accept “Republic of China”)
This man issued the Code of the Rayas to improve the plight of Christians working on Sipahi farms. After forming the “Unholy Alliance” with Francis I, this man sent the corsair Hayreddin Barbarossa to patrol European waters. This man worked with Ebussuud Effendi in order to reconcile the Kanun code with Sha’ria, earning the title Lawgiver. For ten points, identify this longest reigning Ottoman sultan who brought the empire to its territorial height.	ANSWER: SuleimantheMagnificent(acceptSuleimanI) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
During the debates over this agreement, Henry S. Foote drew a pistol on Thomas Hart Benton over a plan proposed by a “Committee of Thirteen.” Charles Jenkins’ Georgia Platform promised “no further assaults”  on  rights  as  long  as  this  agreement  was  in  place.  The  boundaries  of  Texas  were  set  by  this agreement in exchange for the assumption of $10 million of debt. Trading slaves in Washington D.C. was made  illegal  by,  for  ten  points,  what  series  of  five  bills  negotiated  by  Henry  Clay  that  eased  tensions between slave and free states?	ANSWER: Compromiseof1850
A  prelude  to  this  effort  was  calculated  by  Reginald  Waite  and  run  by  Sir  Brian  Robertson,  who proposed this effort. This effort’s planners included Albert Wedermeyer, who used his expertise in traveling over  the  “Hump.”  A  dispute  over  the  introduction  of  a  new  currency  into  the  Allied  Occupation  Zone prompted  this  effort.  This  effort,  codenamed  Operation  Vittles,  delivered  13,000  tons  of  supplies  daily. For ten points, name this 1948 crisis where the RAF and USAAF supplied a German city.	ANSWER: BerlinAirlift(acceptBerlinBlockade)
This  monarch  lost  the  Battle  of  Langside  to  the  Earl  of  Moray  after  being  forced  to  abdicate  and escaping imprisonment at Loch Leven Castle. Letters sent from this person to the Earl of Bothwell, the Casket Letters, might imply this person killed her husband Lord Darnley. The Bond of Association gave precedent  to  execute  this  Catholic  monarch  supported  in  the  Rising  of  the  North  for  her  role  in  the Babington Plot. For ten points, name this Stuart queen executed by Elizabeth I.	ANSWER: Mary, Queen ofScotland (acceptMary, Queen ofScots, prompt on Mary alone)
The goals of this period were changed in the “Reverse Course” which instead aimed to create a strong industrial  base.  The  Recreation  and  Amusement  Association  was  created  during  this  period  to  oversee legalized prostitution and reduce the incidents of rape. This period was ended by the San Francisco Peace Treaty  which  restored  sovereignty  to  a  certain  nation  except  for  the  Ryukyu  Islands.  The  MacArthur Constitution was drafted during, for ten points, what post-World War II period in which an East Asian nation was occupied by the United States?	ANSWER: occupationofJapan(acceptJapanafter occupation is read; prompt on “post-war Japan”)
Inscriptions  at  this  site  tell  of  a  visit  from  the  monk  Ukondafu  Kazufusa,  who  confused  this  site with  the  Jetavana  Garden.  The  city  of  Thom  became  the  new  capital  after  the  Chams  sacked  this  site in  the  12th  century,  while  the  Bayon  replaced  this  site  as  state  temple.  Originally  dedicated  to  Vishnu by Suryavarman II, this site was eventually converted to a Buddhist temple. For ten points, identify this Khmer religious site that appears on the Cambodian flag.	ANSWER: AngkorWat Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 4
This woman nearly fell over during a botched curtsy in front of King George VI. This woman was sent to Craig House in 1941 and was later relocated to St. Coletta School for Exceptional Children, where she spent the last 66 years of her life. Eunice Shriver founded the Special Olympics in honor of this woman, who underwent a failed lobotomy 22 years before the assassination of her brother John. For ten points, name this member of the Kennedy family.	ANSWER: RosemaryKennedy(orRoseMarieKennedy)
This  empire  was  founded  by  As-Saffah  shortly  after  a  military  victory  at  the  Zab  River.  Under Al-Mansur, this empire sent four thousand mercenaries to help put down the An Lushan Rebellion. This empire ceded power to the Seljuks in the 11th century and was eventually destroyed by Hulagu Khan’s Mongol armies. Harun al-Rashid, a ruler of this empire, established the House of Wisdom in its capital of Baghdad. For ten points, name this successor to the Umayyad Caliphate that oversaw the Islamic Golden Age.	ANSWER: AbbasidCaliphate
One side’s strategy in this event was later replicated in Operations Ariel and Cycle, which targeted Le Havre and Cherbourg. In anticipation of this event, 26 May was declared a national day of prayer by George VI. Codenamed Operation Dynamo, this event’s success relied upon “little ships” such as yachts and  civilian  fishing  boats  that  crossed  the  English  Channel.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  “miracle”  in which the British Expeditionary Force was evacuated from a French beach.	ANSWER: evacuation from Dunkirk(accept descriptive answers that mentionDunkirk)
Gaspar Gorricio helped this man compile the Book of Prophecies. While traveling with the Pinz ́on brothers,  this  man  encountered  the  chief  Guacanagari.  This  subject  of  the  Capitulations  of  Santa  Fe was  replaced  by  Francisco  de  Bobadilla  as  governor  of  the  Indies.  The  400th  anniversary  of  his  most notable  achievement  was  commemorated  by  the  1893  Chicago  World’s  Fair.  For  ten  points,  name  this Genoan-born explorer who commanded the Ni ̃na, the Pinta, and the Santa Maria to the New World.	ANSWER: Christopher Columbus(or CristoforColombo; or Crist ́obalCol ́on)
While working for this government, an orphaned radio specialist aids in the hunt for the Sea of Flame jewel in Anthony Doerr’s Pulitzer-winning novelAll the Light We Cannot See. Annemarie Johansen fools a canine unit employed by this government using a basket laced with cocaine in a novel in which a group of refugees flee to Sweden from this government’s reach. For ten points, Lois Lowry’s novelNumber the Starsis set during what government’s occupation of Denmark in 1943?	ANSWER: NaziGermany(accept either underlined portion; accept theThirdReich) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 4
This man was granted foreign aid from France through the Treaty of Barwalde. This man invaded Livonia in his early career to fend off a challenge from his Polish cousin Sigismund III, and his country was administered by Axel Oxenstierna after this man was slain leading a cavalry charge at L ̈utzen. This man had earlier secured a decisive victory against the Holy Roman Empire at Breitenfeld. For ten points, name this Lion of the North who led Sweden in the Thirty Years War.	ANSWER: GustavusAdolphus(orGustavIIAdolf)
A cartoonish video game based on this board game includes a faction of cats led by Generalissimo Meow.  In  1957,  filmmaker  Albert  Lamorisse  invented  this  boardgame,  whose  1999  Napoleon-themed edition added fortresses. Italy and Spain are among the neutral zones in the “Castle” edition of this board game. Players can roll up to three red dice to start an attack in this game. The Australia strategy may be employed in, for ten points, what strategic board game whose board contains 42 territories spread out across six continents?	ANSWER: Risk(acceptRisk: Factions)
This  man  led  a  military  action  that  freed  Lewis  Washington  from  being  a  hostage  in  the  Allstadt House  and  Ordinary,  property  that  had  been  owned  by  this  man’s  family.  This  colonel  ordered  Israel Greene  to  attack  an  engine  house  after  his  aide-de-camp,  Jeb  Stuart,  failed  to  negotiate  a  peaceful departure from a federal armory. For ten points, name this man who led forces against John Brown at Harpers Ferry in 1859, years before he served as the commander of the Confederate Army.	ANSWER: Robert Edward Lee
Robert  Salmond  first  applied  this  policy  in  ordering  Colonel  Seton  to  man  the  pumps  during  an event  memorialized  in  Rudyard  Kipling’s  poem  “Soldier  an’  Sailor  Too.”  This  phrase  was  popularized after that incident in which the troopshipBirkenheadstruck a rock just off the Western Cape in South Africa.  J.  Bruce  Ismay  was  criticized  for  not  following  this  code,  which  explained  why  several  partially filled  lifeboats  were  set  off  from  theTitanic.  For  ten  points,  name  this  unofficial,  chivalric  policy  that prioritizes certain passengers during shipwrecks.	ANSWER: womenandchildrenare saved from a shipwreckfirst(accept descriptive equivalents)
The Heged ̈us Reforms attempted to combat the effects of this phenomenon as Hungary faced it in the aftermath of the Treaty of Trianon. Another instance of this phenomenon was sparked by a general strike  in  the  Ruhr.  J.P.  Morgan  Jr.  co-led  a  conference  that  sought  a  solution  to  that  instance  of  this phenomenon, in which the Reichsbank produced notes worth 100 trillion marks. For ten points, name this type of destabilization of the value of a currency, famously experienced by the Weimar [vye-mar] Republic.	ANSWER: (hyper)inflation Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 4
One side in this battle halted fire due to a miscommunication about the remaining ammunition; to maintain  morale,  that  side  informed  its  men  that  the  pause  was  to  have  breakfast.  The  direction  “you may fire when you are ready, Gridley” was given to begin this battle. In this battle, George Dewey’s U.S. fleet lost one sailor to heatstroke and sunk 8 Spanish ships. For ten points, name this May 1, 1898 battle of the Spanish-American War, fought in the harbor of the Philippine capital city.	ANSWER: Battle of ManilaBay(do not prompt on Manila alone)
An army from this region intercepted King Josiah at Megiddo and killed him. Near the end of his life, the prophet Jeremiah was forced to move to this region against his will. A family fled to this region to escape King Herod’s decree to kill all boys two years or younger. The firstborn of every household in this region was slaughtered before its leader allowed the Israelites to leave. For ten points, name this region that, in numerous Biblical stories, was ruled by pharaohs.	ANSWER: Egypt
The  two  Pelham  brothers  successively  held  this  post;  the  elder  was  forced  from  office  after  the loss  of  Minorca.  This  position’s  foundation  came  from  Standing  Order  66,  which  limits  the  proposal  of expenditure  bills.  As  a  result  of  that  order,  the  first  holder  of  this  position  was  also  First  Lord  of  the Treasury and came to power after the burst of the South Sea Bubble; that man was Robert Walpole. For ten points, name this political position whose holder lives in 10 Downing Street and is currently the head of Queen Elizabeth’s Cabinet.	ANSWER: PrimeMinisteroftheUnitedKingdom(orPMofUK; accept GreatBritainand/or Englandin place ofUK; prompt on partial answers)
This man sacked the castle of Jacob’s Ford after a bribe of 100,000 gold pieces to stop the castle’s construction  was  turned  down.  Though  this  man  was  defeated  at  the  Battle  of  Montgisard,  he  later formed a truce with Baldwin IV. One campaign against this man was called after his victory at Hattin, though he ended that conflict by granting Christians safe pilgrimage to Jerusalem. For ten points, name this Kurdish founder of the Ayyubid dynasty, an enemy of Richard I in the Third Crusade.	ANSWER: Saladin(or An-NasirSalahad-DinYusuf ibn Ayyub)
This team lost a group of promising young players in the 1958 Munich air disaster, though a survivor of that crash, Bobby Charlton, held the goalscoring record for this club until 2017. A manager who gave locker room tirades known as “hairdryer treatments” won 13 Premier League titles with this club, which is  currently  managed  by  the  Portuguese  former  manager  of  Chelsea,  Jos ́e  Mourinho.  Sir  Alex  Ferguson once coached, for ten points, what English soccer team led by Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Wayne Rooney?	ANSWER: ManchesterUnitedF.C. (prompt on Manchester and/or United alone; prompt on ManU) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 4
Contemporary historian James Ronda has written several books about this event, one of which claims that  a  comparable  event  was  led  by  James  Mackay  and  John  Thomas  Evans.  During  this  event,  Fort Clatsop  was  constructed  along  the  Columbia  River.  Participants  in  this  event  included  a  slave  named York, Toussaint[too-sahn] Charbonneau, and Charbonneau’s Shoshone wife, Sacagawea. For ten points, name this voyage that explored the Missouri River, including much of the Louisiana Purchase.	ANSWER: LewisandClarkExpedition (acceptCorpsofDiscovery)
In ancient times, this currency was worth 6 obols. In 1828, the phoenix replaced the Ottoman kurus, then  itself  was  replaced  four  years  later  by  the  “phoenix,”  adorned  with  King  Otto’s  face;  both  this currency and the phoenix were equivalent to 100 lepta. In 1973, this currency replaced the image of the deposed King Constantine with more phoenix imagery and the phrase “Hellenic Republic.” For ten points, name this currency used by both the ancient and modern, pre-Euro Greeks.	ANSWER:drachma
This man testified on behalf of Robel Phillipos after the Boston Marathon bombing. In 1988, this man fired Donna Brazile for claiming his opponent was cheating with Jennifer Fitzgerald. During a presidential campaign, this man was attacked for supporting prisoner’s weekend furlough passes in the Willie Horton ad and for opposing “virtually every defense system” in the Tank ad. For ten points, name this former Massachusetts governor who lost to George H.W. Bush in 1988.	ANSWER: Michael Dukakis
An  issue  of291magazine  was  entirely  devoted  to  this  work,  possible  because  the  magazine  was founded by its artist. A man in a prayer shawl and several women in headscarves stand in the bottom third  of  this  work,  whose  left  side  is  dominated  by  a  large  rising  mast  and  a  white  drawbridge.  This modernist  work  was  taken  on  theKaiser Wilhelm IIas  it  traveled  from,  not  to,  New  York  City,  as  is commonly assumed. For ten points, name this 1907 photograph of lower class passengers, taken by Alfred Stieglitz.	ANSWER: The Steerage
In  one  work,  Thomas  Carlyle  cites  how  this  statement’s  speaker  could  be  met  with  “silence  and abashed  looks”  after  saying  it.  This  statement’s  speaker  apparently  contradicted  this  statement  on  his deathbed, noting that while he is “going away,” a certain entity “will always remain.” This statement was probably a fabrication by opponents of its speaker. For ten points, name this statement that may or may not have been said by Louis XIV in a demonstration of his absolutist power.	ANSWER: Iamthestate(orL’ ́etat,c’estmoi; accept close translations along the lines ofImyself amthenation) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 4
While serving as a Senator, this man drafted the Violence Against Women Act and oversaw Robert Bork’s Supreme Court confirmation hearing as chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee. This man was accused of plagiarizing a speech by Labour politician Neil Kinnock during his 1988 Presidential run. In another  campaign,  this  man  called  a  “lecture  on  embassy  security”  a  “bunch  of  malarkey”  in  a  debate with 2012 Paul Ryan. For ten points, name this current Vice President of the United States.	ANSWER: Joseph Robinette “Joe” Biden
Heinrich Kreutz names a group of these objects, whose members include Ikeya-Seki. The Giotto probe observes these objects and is named because the painter Giotto incorporated one of these objects into his Adoration of the Magi. The destruction of one of these objects named Shoemaker-Levy 9 was observed in 1994. Long period ones may originate from the Oort Cloud. Another of these objects last visited earth in 1986 and will return in 2061. For ten points, name these astronomical objects, one of which is named for Edmond Halley.	ANSWER: comets
One  man  who  worked  for  this  organization  was  possibly  assassinated  by  the  ARENA  party  in  El Salvador. Another man from this organization, Aloysius Stepinac, was jailed for feuding with Joseph Tito. In  addition  to  the  aforementioned  Oscar  Romero,  another  assassination  target  from  this  organization was targeted in the Bojinka plot by the Grey Wolves and Mehmed Ali Agca [AH-jah]. That person was of Polish descent and took his name from his predecessor, who had died after 33 days in office. For ten points, name this organization formerly led by John Paul II.	ANSWER: RomanCatholicChurch
In 1757, tens of thousands of people who had recently performed this action died when a group led by  Qa’dan  al-Faiz  raided  their  caravan.  Unlike  a  similar  action,  this  action  must  be  done  during  Dhu al-Hijjah. This action includes a series of rituals, including drinking from the Zamzam Well, the symbolic stoning of the devil, and circling the Kaaba seven times. For ten points, name this pillar of Islam that requires Muslims to, at least once in a lifetime, undertake a pilgrimage to Mecca.	ANSWER: Hajj(prompt on pilgrimage to Mecca or similar descriptions before mentioned)
In  this  film,  a  character  known  as  the  “Little  Colonel”  is  hospitalized  and  meets  Elsie.  An  attack on  the  Cameron  family  is  thwarted  in  this  film,  whose  character  of  Austin  Stoneman  was  inspired  by Thaddeus Stevens. Like inApocalypse Now, “The Ride of the Valkyries” is played during a charge in this film. Thomas Dixon, the author of its source material, arranged it to be screened at the White House for Woodrow Wilson. For ten points, name this 1915 D.W. Griffith film that glorified the Ku Klax Klan.	ANSWER: The BirthofaNation(accept TheClansman) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 4
Abraham Woodhull and Robert Townsend performed this action after being recruited by Benjamin Tallmadge.  While  performing  this  action,  Hercules  Mulligan  used  his  slave  Cato  as  a  courier.  John Champe defected to the British army while performing this action, and while working for the British in London,  Edward  Bancroft  performed  this  action.  The  Culper  Ring  was  created  to  perform  this  action, whose perpetrators were considered illegal combatants. For ten points, name this wartime act for which Nathan Hale was hanged.	ANSWER: spyingfortheUnitedStates(accept equivalents; prompt on partial answers)
This event was foreshadowed by a poem that described rolled up tube socks and noted “I’m ready to let you go.” A Jordan Clarkson full-court assist punctuated this event, the subject of an eBay auction of a bag of air that reached $15,000 before it was pulled. This event took place on the same day that Golden State won its 73rd game. For ten points, name this April 2016 event which featured 50 field goal attempts, 60 points, and the conclusion “Mamba out” from a 20-year veteran of the L.A. Lakers.	ANSWER: KobeBryant’sfinalNBAgame(orKobeBryant’sretirement; accept first and/or last name; prompt on “Mamba out” before mentioned; prompt on Lakers Season Finale)
In  this  country,  the  Trail  of  the  Eagles’  Nests  is  a  series  of  25  castles  built  by  this  country’s  only king to be styled “the Great.” This country’s first Christian ruler, Mieszko I, conquered Mazovia for the Piast  dynasty,  a  ruling  house  that  ended  after  the  death  of  the  aforementioned  Casimir  the  Great.  For ten points, name this European country that joined in a 17th century commonwealth with Lithuania and maintained dual capitals at Vilnius and Krakow.	ANSWER: Poland
Inmates  at  the  Prison  of  the  Annamites  in  this  department  revolted  against  poor conditions  in  Inini.  In  the  1880s,  this  region  fought  a  border-war  with  Brazil  over  the independent  state  of  Counani.  A  man  cried  "Long  live  France!  Long  live  the  Army!"  after being  sentenced  to  life  imprisonment  in  a  penal  colony  in  this  region,  from  which  Henri Charrière  [[shah-ree-YAY]]  escaped,  as  recounted  in  his  novel Papillon [[pah-pee-YOHN]]. The  European  Space  Agency  constructed  its  primary  space  center  in  ,  for  ten  points,  what French overseas region, where Alfred Dreyfus was imprisoned on Devil’s Island.	ANSWER: French Guiana (accept La Guyane Française; prompt on "Devil's Island" before mentioned)
This man is the subject of a work by Joseph Califano titled The Triumph and Tragedy of [this man], and over 400 collections of manuscripts were relied upon by Robert Dalleck in another biography of this man. A four-volume series, including such entries as The Passage of Power and Master of the Senate,  was  written  about  this  one-time  Speaker  of  the  House. For  ten  points,  Robert  Caro  wrote  that  four-volume  biography  of  what  man  who  took  the presidential oath on an airplane?	ANSWER: Lyndon B(aines) Johnson (accept LBJ; prompt on “Johnson”)
This monarch appointed Edward Courtenay, 1st Earl of Devon, royal envoy to Holy Roman  Emperor  Charles  V  but  rejected  his  ambition  for  the  throne.  Robert  Aske  led  a popular revolt, known as the Pilgrimage of Grace, aiming to restore this royal to the English line  of  succession.  Phillip  II of  Spain  used  his  marriage  to  this  daughter  of  Catherine  of Aragon  as  a  pretext  to  invade  the  British  Isles  in  the  1580s.  The  English  Reformation  was nearly  undone  by,  for  ten  points,  what  "Bloody"  queen  of  the  Tudor  Dynasty,  the  sister  of Elizabeth I?	ANSWER: Mary I (or Mary Tudor; accept Bloody Mary)
This politician justified the use of force during colonization efforts in his "Report on Algeria,"  written  during  Algerian  occupation  by  the  army  of  King  Louis  Philippe.  This  man wrote about the disconnection between the hereditary nobility and rural peasant leading to the disintegration of the Ancien Régime [[ahn-SHYAHN reh-ZHEEM]] in The Old Regime and the Revolution.  This  man  also  collected  data  for  a  book  while  ostensibly  on  a  tour  of  U.S. prisons. For ten points, name this French aristocrat and author of Democracy in America.	ANSWER: Alexis de Tocqueville (or Alexis Charles Henri Clérel, comte de Tocqueville)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 6
In 1980, this state's Lake Peigneur was contaminated when an oil rig hit a salt mine, making the water brackish. Edwin Edwards served four terms as governor of this state and won  one  election  with  the  slogan  "Vote  for  the  lizard,  not  the  wizard"  while  campaigning against KKK Grand Wizard David Duke. The "Share Our Wealth" program was advocated by a  governor  of  this  state  whom  Robert  Penn  Warren  called  a  "Dictator."  Huey  Long  once governed, for ten points, what Bayou State?	ANSWER: Louisiana
In this empire's chronology, the phrase "the king who lived in tents" is used to refer to  its  first  domestic  rulers,  beginning  with  Tudiya.  The  practice  of  deporting  hostile  ethnic groups was introduced by Shalmaneser I, a king of this empire, following his conquest of the Mitanni.  The  fields  of  Susa  were  sown  with  salt  following  a  humiliation  inflicted  by  the Elamites  on  this  empire's  people,  resulting  in  that  violent  act  by  Ashurbanipal.  The  city  of Assur  served  as  the  capital  of,  for  ten  points,  what  Mesopotamian  empire  of  Sargon  II  and Sennacherib [[seh-NAH-keh-rib]]?	ANSWER: Assyrian Empire (or Assyrians; accept Neo-Assyrian Empire)
This  structure  was  completed  in  1957  under  the  direction  of  William  H.  Pickering, and flooding nearly destroyed the particle accelerator chamber in which the data tapes for this  structure  were  archived.  This  structure  was  equipped  with  a  cosmic  ray  detector  co- designed by graduate students in a basement of a physics building. The radiation belts that this structure discovered were named after physicist James Van Allen. For ten points, what was this first satellite launched by NASA?	ANSWER: Explorer 1 (prompt on "Explorer")
In  2017,  the  ARSA  military  organization  launched  attacks  in  this  country's  Arakan, or  Rakhine,  State.  This  country's  government  conducted  Operation  Dragon  King  under  the orders of the socialist dictator Ne Win. In February 2021, a leader of this country, who had earlier  won  the  Nobel  Peace  Prize,  was  overthrown  in  a  Tatmadaw  coup.  For  ten  points, name this Southeast Asian country formerly led by Aung San Suu Kyi [[CHEE]] where over 500,000 Muslim Royhinga refugees have fled to neighboring Bangladesh since 2017.	ANSWER: Myanmar (or Republic of the Union of Myanmar; or Pyidaunzu Thanmăda Myăma Nainngandaw; accept Burma)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 6
In  reference  to  this  figure,  scientist  Olesya  Turkina  said,  "We  did  not  learn  enough from  the  mission  to  justify  the  death  of  [this  astronaut]."  A  monument  depicts  this  figure cradled  by  hands  whose  digits  double  as  rockets,  a  part  of  the  larger  "Monument  to  the Conquerors   of   Space."   Scientist   Vladimir   Yazdovsky   trained   this   cosmonaut to   eat   a specialized gel  and  kept her  in  progressively  smaller  cages  to  prep her  for spaceflight. The term "Muttnik" was given to, for ten points, what Moscow stray dog, the first animal to orbit earth?	ANSWER: Laika [[LYE-kah]] (accept "Muttnik" before mentioned)
An  ancient  inscription  banning  this  event  was  discovered  in  Tiriolo,  Italy  in  1640. Investigations  of  these  events  were  conducted  by  Spurius  Postumius  Albinus  [[ahl-BEE- nooss]]  and  Quintus  Marcius  Philippus.  Hispala  Faecenia  [[fay-keh-NEE-ah]]  was  awarded 100,000  bronze  coins  for  giving  her  testimony  about  these  events.  The  Legislation  of  186 states  that  these  events  were  to  be  overlooked  by  the  Senate.  Traditions  of  these  events were  accounted  for  by  Livy  in  his History of Rome.  For  ten  points,  what  unofficial  festivals celebrated the Greco-Roman god of wine?	ANSWER: Bacchanalia (accept Bachanals; prompt on "festivals of Bacchus" and similar answers)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 6
Anthony,  Duke  of  Brabant,  arrived  late  to  this  battle,  where  he  used  a  trumpeter's flag  to  make  a  surcoat.  One  leader  at  this  battle  ordered  the  mass  execution  of  prisoners after  Ysembart  [[EE-zem-barht]]  stole  the victor's  crown  from  a  baggage  train.  This  battle, which occurred on St. Crispin’s Day, led to the marriage of Charles VI's daughter and its victor  in  the  Treaty  of  Troyes  [[TWAH]].  For  ten  points,  name  this  victory  for  Henry  V during the Hundred Years’ War, which included heavy use of longbows.	ANSWER: Battle of Agincourt [[AH-zhin-corh]] (accept Battle of Azincourt; be lenient on pronunciation)
In  1968,  this  artist  was  shot  by  radical  feminist  Valerie  Solanas,  which  may  have contributed  to  his  death  nineteen years later. In 2013, this artist’s Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster) sold for $105 million. This artist’s Factory in New York City hosted a film studio, an  assembly  line  for  lithograph  and  silk-screening  production,  and  drug-fueled  parties featuring celebrities  and free-thinkers.  For  ten  points,  name  this  pop artist best  known  for his Marilyn Diptych and depictions of Campbell’s Soup Cans.	ANSWER: Andy Warhol
One  candidate  in  this  presidential  election  year  secured  nomination  on  the  second ballot  after  the  withdrawal  of  Samuel  J.  Randall.  This  was  the  first  election  year  during which Belva Lockwood appeared on the ballot. The rallying cry "Burn this letter" during this election  year  was  popularized  after  a  discovery  of  some  papers  by  James  Mulligan.  The slogan "Ma, Ma, Where’s my Pa?" mocked the philandering of this year's election winner. For ten points, name this election year in which James G. Blaine lost to Grover Cleveland.	ANSWER: 1884
As part of this project, Kevin Kruse wrote a work titled for how one policy “Caused a Traffic Jam.” Jake Silverstein wrote a “clarification” of this project, which was the subject of a  proposal  by  Tom  Cotton  to  ban  federal  funding  to  schools  that  taught  it.  Nikole  Hannah- Jones developed this project, which included pieces on Crispus Attucks and Phillis Wheatley. The  arrival  of  a  privateer  in  colonial  Virginia  inspired  the  date  that  names,  for  ten  points, what ongoing initiative from The New York Times Magazine focusing on slavery’s impact on America?	ANSWER: The 1619 Project  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 5
A  shield  logo  representing  one  of  these  institutions  depicts  a  set  of  staples  on  the right  half  in  honor  of  its  co-founder, Seth Staples. A process called “elenchus” [[eh-LEN- koos]]  provided  the  basis  for  a  practice  at  these  institutions  that  is  often  paired  with  one that relies on casebooks. Plato’s Theaetetus [[thee-ih-TEE-tuss]]  may  have  introduced  a method of “argument by refutation” used at these institutions named for Socrates. Moot court  competitions  are  held  at,  for  ten  points,  what  educational  institutions  at  which students prepare for the bar exam?	ANSWER: Law schools (prompt on "colleges," "universities," or "schools")
After  this  man  was  killed  in  Chicago  in  1969,  one  group  went  on  a  bombing  spree and  planned  to  bomb  Fort Dix. The month before his death, this man stated, "What we’re going to try to do, is we’re going to try to rap and educate" in a speech about class struggle at Northern Illinois University. After this man's death, Bobby Rush took his former position and said "we have to arm ourselves." William O'Neal drugged this man with barbiturates for the FBI, after which the Chicago police killed him and Mark Clark. For ten points, name this Black Panther leader.	ANSWER: Frederick "Fred" Hampton
This  man  saved  his  wingman,  "Jig  Dog"  Ramage  [[RAM-uhj]],  while  serving  as  a fighter pilot. NASA presents an annual Technology in Education Award named for this man. This  man  was  part  of  a  group  including  Wally  Schirra  and  Deke  Slayton  and  followed  Yuri Gagarin in a feat on the Freedom 7, part of the Redstone 3 mission. The oldest man to walk on the moon as part of the Apollo 14 mission, this man hit two golf balls on the moon. The head  of  the  first  crewed  Project  Mercury  flight,  for  ten  points,  who  was  this  astronaut,  the first American to travel into space?	ANSWER: Alan Shepard
This  man's  assassination  in  Prague  was  the  subject  of  a  film  co-written  by  Bertolt Brecht  and  Fritz  Lang  titled Hangmen Also Die!.  This  man  implemented  the Einsatzgruppen mobile  death  trucks,  and  he  ran  the  death  camp  at  Chelmno  [[HELM-noh]].  This  "Blonde Beast"  called  a  meeting  during  which  Adolf  Eichmann  created  a  list  of  Jews  in  various countries.  This  official  organized  the  Wannsee  [[VAHN-zay]]  Conference,  which  united  the German   bureaucratic branches   behind   the   Final   Solution.   For   ten   points,   name   this commander of the SS, the architect of the Holocaust.	ANSWER: Reinhard Heydrich  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 5
Historian  Ben  Kiernan,  who  studied  the  abuses  of  this  regime,  estimates  that between 1.67 and 1.87 million people died as a result of its genocidal policies. In 1975, this regime  seized  the  U.S.  merchant  vessel  SS Mayaguez.  This  political  regime’s  Standing Committee included Brother Number Two and Brother Number Three, both of whom were later  convicted  by  a  UN  tribunal  for  crimes  against  humanity.  For  ten  points,  name  this Cambodian  political  regime supported  by  the  Viet  Cong  and  the  Chinese Communist  Party, which was led by Pol Pot.	ANSWER: Khmer Rouge (accept Democratic Kampuchea; accept Communist Party of Cambodia; prompt on "Kampuchea" or "Cambodia")
On  the  first  day  of  this  event,  the  leader  of  the  Escambray  Rebellion  was  captured and  immediately  executed.  In  preparation  for  this  event,  the  failed  Operation  Puma  was meant to destroy the armed aircraft of the FAR. This event took place mostly on Girón [[hee- ROHN]]  Beach  and  was  executed  by  Brigade  2506,  composed  of  exiles  who  intended  to overthrow  Fidel  Castro.  For  ten  points,  name  this  failed  1961  landing  operation,  covertly supported by the Kennedy administration.	ANSWER: Bay of Pigs Invasion (accept Invasión de Bahía de Cochinos; also accept Invasión de Playa Girón or Batalla de Girón before "Girón" is mentioned)   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 5
Following  the  signing  of  a  petition  named  for  this  area,  John  Bowne  illegally  housed  Quakers in  his  home.  William  Steinway  of  Steinway  &  Sons  built  the  Steinway  Village  in  this  area’s  Astoria neighborhood. Thirty people signed the Flushing Remonstrance in this borough against Director-General Peter Stuyvesant. This borough is the sight of the Unisphere, built for the 1964 New York World’s Fair. For ten points, name this New York City Borough, the location of John F. Kennedy International Airport.	ANSWER:Queens
This  man  was  legendarily  scolded  by  a  peasant  woman  after  letting  her  griddle  cakes  burn.  This leader’s  father,  Aethelwulf,  sent  him  to  Rome  to  be  coronated  by  Pope  Leo  IV.  He  isn’t  William  the Conqueror, but this king compiled his law code in the “Doom Book.” This leader forced the Danish King, Guthrum, to convert to Christianity after defeating him at the Battle of Eddington. For ten points, name this “Great” King of Wessex.	ANSWER:AlfredThe Great
Testimony  by  this  man  was  used  by  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Betamax  Case  which  dealt  with the home video market, leading to approval of PBS funding. This Presbyterian minister also worked in television  and  offered  children  relief  during  the  First  Gulf  War  and  the  Invasion  of  Iraq.  Daniel  Tiger, Henrietta Pussycat and King Friday feature on this man’s show. For ten points, name this cardigan-wearing creator of a PBS show titled for his namesake “Neighborhood.”	ANSWER: Mr.Rogers(accept FredRogers)
Despite losing most of his money in an Algerian oil deal, this man refused to appear in alcohol and cigarette commercials, claiming it would be a bad influence. This man’s autobiography To Hell and Back was  adapted  into  a  movie  in  which  he  starred.  This  man  slept  with  a  loaded  gun  under  his  pillow  as indication of his PTSD after single-handedly holding off hundreds of Germans in the Colmar Pocket. For ten points, name this Medal of Honor winner and movie star.	ANSWER: AudieMurphy
In order to downplay a defeat, this country’s Gothic Line was renamed to the Green Line by Albert Kesselring. This country’s forces faced Operation Avenger in which bombers controversially destroyed the historic abbey of Monte Cassino. A dead body with false war plans was floated ashore prior to the invasion of this country in Operation Husky. This country’s capital fell on June 5th, 1944 after an offensive from Anzio. For ten points, Mark Clark controversially captured what country’s capital in 1944?	ANSWER:Italy Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
Ismail al-Azhari was the first prime minister of this country, where the Anyanya rebels fought a civil war from 1955 to 1972 that was ended by the Addis Ababa Agreement. The Nuer White Army enlisted child  soldiers  during  this  country’s  Second  Civil  War  which  ended  in  2005.  The  Justice  and  Equality Movement  are  fighting  the  Janjaweed  in,  for  ten  points,  what  African  country  led  by  Omar  al-Bashir whose Southern neighbor seceded in 2011?	ANSWER: Republic of theSudan(accept NorthSudan, do not accept “South Sudan”)
During  this  man’s  early  career  as  the  Allied  head  of  Combined  Operations,  he  planned  both  the successful  bombing  of  St.  Nazaire  and  the  disastrous  Dieppe  Raid.  This  man  hired  Cyril  Radcliffe  to form  a  line  of  partition  to  separate  the  Muslim  League  and  the  Indian  National  Congress  following independence. For ten points, identify British India’s last Viceroy who was assassinated by the IRA when a bomb exploded aboard his fishing boat.	ANSWER: LouisMountbatten(accept 1st EarlMountbattenof Burma)
During a civil war in this country, the HMS Orestes faced fire from both sides and a commander using the alias “Carlos de Ponza” led the navy. Miguel I entered exile after this country’s Liberal Wars. After this country’s King Sebastian died at Alcacer Quibir, this country entered a union with its neighbor until the Restoration War. Like Spain, French forces invaded this country in the Peninsular War. The House of Braganza ruled, for ten points, what Iberian country?	ANSWER:Portugal
According to Xenophon’s version of this event, the central figure refused the aid of his friends because the possibility of death was better than senility. According to one source of this event, the central figure offered to pay a fine of 30 mina as an alternative to banishment and execution. As a result of this event, a certain philosopher was forced to drink hemlock. For ten points, name this event where the teacher of Plato was convicted of the corruption of the youth of Athens.	ANSWER:TrialofSocrates(acceptapologyofSocrates,  accept  equivalents  to  “Trial,”  do  NOT accept or prompt on the death of execution of Socrates)
This man headed off Napoleon III’s attempt to annex Hawaii with the statement that his country would  not  “stand  for  any  such  action.”  This  man  unsuccessfully  ran  for  president  on  the  ticket  of  the Know-Nothing Party in the election of 1856. This man dismissed his predecessor’s cabinet and took the lead in pushing through Henry Clay’s proposals in the Compromise of 1850. For ten points, name the last Whig president of the United States who succeeded Zachary Taylor.	ANSWER: MillardFillmore Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 5
A colony in this country was governed by Burnaby’s Code and faced the Spanish attack of the Battle of St. George’s Caye. George Price led this country’s People United party, where logwood was once heavily extracted by the English. This country is the site of the Mayan city of Caracol. The British maintained troops in this country after this country’s 1981 independence to deter claims from neighboring Guatemala. For ten points, name this country once known as British Honduras, which has its capital at Belmopan.	ANSWER: Belize
Dusty Baker and Glenn Burke played for this team in 1977 when they supposedly invented the high five. Mayor Norris Poulson reversed city plans for the Elysian Park Heights public housing development in favor of giving land in Chavez Ravine to Walter O’Malley, the owner of this team. This team’s fans have a reputation for arriving late and leaving games early, in large part due to traffic nightmares on the 110 Freeway and Sunset Boulevard. For ten points, name this Major League Baseball team that, after 1957, moved from Brooklyn to Los Angeles.	ANSWER:  Los  Angeles Dodgers(accept  BrooklynDodgersafter  “Norris”  is  read;  prompt  on  “Los Angeles”; prompt on “Brooklyn” after “Norris” is read)
Negotiations for this treaty began after one side invoked promises made to them in the papal bull Aeterni regis. Two bulls namedInter caeterapreceded this treaty and were amended byDudum siquidem, which was rejected since it excluded John II from India. Pope Alexander VI helped mediate this treaty that granted Brazil to one party, following a demarcation line 370 leagues west of Cape Verde. For ten points, identify this treaty that divided the New World between Spain and Portugal.	ANSWER: Treaty of Tordesillas
In a meeting with Golda Meir, this man argued that if the Soviet Union were to put Jews into gas chambers  that it  was  “not an  American concern.”  This  politician  labeled Indira Gandhi  a  “witch” and claimed  that  “the  Indians  are  bastards”  after  siding  with  Bangladesh  in  a  1971  war.  In  the  Halloween Massacre, this man was removed as Gerald Ford’s National Security Adviser but was allowed to maintain his  role  as  Secretary  of  State.  For  ten  points,  name  this  American  statesman  who  won  the  1973  Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating a ceasefire in Vietnam.	ANSWER: Henry Kissinger
The Tummal Inscription verified this mythical person’s existence. Nancy Sandars’ translation of the most famous work about this man notes that Gudea may have conflated his achievements with this man. This  “two-thirds  divine,  one-third  mortal”  is  challenged  to  stay  awake  in  order  to  obtain  a  plant  that grants immortality by Utnapishtim. This man slays Humbaba in the Cedar Forest with his best friend, Enkidu. For ten points, name this protagonist of a namesake Mesopotamian epic.	ANSWER: Gilgamesh Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
After being denied membership from this state’s Thule Society, Anton Arco-Valley assassinated Kurt Eisner, a leader of this state’s Soviet Republic. Ashkenazi Jews were targeted during the 1819 Hep-Hep riots  in  this  state.  Prince  Liutpold  ruled  as  regent  for  one  monarch  of  this  state  after  the  latter  was declared insane. The 1918 Anif declaration ended seven centuries of Wittelsbach rule over, for ten points, what German state that saw “Mad King” Ludwig II’s rule from its capital at Munich?	ANSWER: Bavaria(orBayern, accept descriptions of “kingdom or “socialist republic”)
During this period, Frank Reid was killed in a shootout with Jesse Murphy. Soapy Smith created a scam telegraph service during this period which faked its replies. Robert Henderson inadvertently sparked this period by advising Skookum Jim to explore Rabbit’s Creek. People participating in this event would often  travel  from  Skagway  before  continuing  on  the  Chikoot  and  White  passes.  Dawson  City  became  a boom  town  due  to,  for  ten  points,  what  19th  century  event  in  which  prospectors  flocked  to  the  Yukon River?	ANSWER: KlondikeGold Rush (acceptYukonGold Rush before “Yukon River” is read)
This  man,  while on  assignment  in the  Netherlands,  established the  first  United States  embassy  on foreign soil. With Edward Rutledge and Benjamin Franklin, this man negotiated the Staten Island Peace Conference with General Howe. In response to growing tensions with European countries, this President signed the Alien and Sedition Acts into law. During one election, this man was handily defeated by the newly  founded  Democratic-Republican  party  of  Thomas  Jefferson.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Federalist Founding Father, the second President of the United States.	ANSWER:JohnAdams(prompt on Adams; do not accept or prompt on John Quincy Adams)
These objects are required to have an ushnisha indentation. 6,666 of these objects rest at the feet of a giant one of these objects at the Spring Temple. An emerald one of these objects has its outfits changed by the King of Thailand each season. 504 of these objects are located at Borobudur in Java. The subjects of these objects include Amitabha and Gautama. For 10 points, name these religious objects often carved by Mahayana and Theravada followers.	ANSWER: statues ofBuddha
Zhang Chai started the “Case of the Wooden Staff Assault” by breaking into the palace of a ruler of this dynasty. The last emperor of this dynasty hung himself at the “guilty pagoda tree” and was the Chongzhen Emperor. This dynasty’s fall began after the Seven Grievances were proclaimed by Nurhachi. One emperor from this dynasty created a namesake encyclopedia and sent Zheng He to Sri Lanka. The Yongle Emperor ruled, for ten points, what dynasty that was succeeded by the Qing?	ANSWER: MingDynasty Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 5
This country attempted to recreate a Six Day War strategy by launching Operation Chengiz Khan, disabling  a  rival’s  air  force  in  retaliation  for  their  support  of  Mukti  Bahini.  Under  Yahya  Khan,  this country  launched  Operation  Searchlight  to  suppress  the  Awami  League,  a  nationalist  movement  in  a breakaway state. This country fought the Kargil War and frequently contests the region of Kashmir with its eastern neighbor. Bangladesh gained its independence from, for ten points, what northwestern neighbor of India?	ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
This  man  wrote  an  opera  about  a  man  mentioned  in  Dante’sInfernowho  impersonated  Buoso Donati; that opera features the area “O mio babbino caro.” This composer ofGianni Schicchi[shee-kee] included Napoleon’s victory at the Battle of Marengo as a plot point in an opera whose title character sings “Vissi d’arte” and kills Baron Scarpia before throwing herself off Rome’s Castel Sant’Angelo. For ten points, name this composer ofToscaand an opera featuring Lieutenant Pinkerton and Cio-Cio San [cho-chosahn],Madame Butterfly.	ANSWER: Giacomo Puccini
The first public acknowledgement of the existence of these documents was a question presented by Fred Thompson to Alexander Butterfield on live TV. One of these documents includes a request to have L. Patrick Gray halt an investigation. Judge Sirica ordered a subpoena to obtain these documents, which were created using an Uher 5000. One of which was altered by Rosemary Woods and includes a mysterious 18-and-a-half minute gap. For ten points, name this type of document that was used as audio evidence in the Watergate scandal.	ANSWER: Richard Nixon’sWhiteHousetaperecordings (acceptWatergatetaperecordings before “Watergate” is mentioned; prompt on partial answers)
In retirement, this man announced a series of articles limiting entertainment expenses and who can ride  on  palanquins,  the  “Laws  of  the  Military  Houses.”  Late  in  life,  this  man  lived  in  Sunpu  Castle, where he had been held hostage as a child. This man abdicated the throne in favor of his son Hidetada [hi-day-tah-da]. This man’s victory at Osaka Castle brought an end to the rival Toyotomi clan. For ten points, name this warlord who established the last shogunate of Japan.	ANSWER:TokugawaIeyasu
This man is the only MLB player with exactly 3,000 hits, a feat he achieved in the final at-bat of his career. After deciding to personally oversee relief efforts in Managua, this player boarded a previously damaged  and  overloaded  DC-7  delivering  aid  to  Nicaraguan  earthquake  victims;  this  man  died  on December 31, 1972 after that plane crashed off the coast of Puerto Rico. Major League Baseball’s award for off-field contributions and a bridge over the Allegheny River are named for, for ten points, what Hall of Fame outfielder for the Pittsburgh Pirates?	ANSWER: Roberto ClementeWalker Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
A letter from Cicero describes this event as a “superb banquet” that he wished he had been a part of; that letter was written to Trebonius, who did take part. Servilius Casca almost revealed the timing of this event, which was later avenged at the Battle of Philippi. Calpurnia failed to deter the target of this event from appearing before the Senate. For ten points, name this event carried out on the Ides of March, 44 BC by Brutus, Cassius, and other conspirators against the dicatator of Rome.	ANSWER: assassination(orkilling,stabbing,  etc.)  of  (Gaius)JuliusCaesar(prompt  on  partial answers, like “assassination of Caesar”)
A  document  calling  for  the  creation  of  this  legislative  body  was  issued  by  a  member  of  the  House of Commons named Edwin Sandys. The first session of this body was presided over by George Yeardley. The cities of Henricus and Hundred Plantation were among those represented in this body. Vetoes could be issued by the governor overseeing this body, which also ceded power to its colony’s namesake company. For ten points, name this elected assembly established in 1619 in the Colony of Virginia.	ANSWER: HouseofBurgesses
A painting in the tomb of Puimre recorded one of these animals called “Nedjem,” or “sweet,” and the tomb painting “Fowling in the Marshes” shows one of these animals biting the wing of a bird. Herodotus described people shaving their eyebrows in mourning for these creatures, eighty thousand of which were found  in  Beni  Hassan,  and  many  of  whom  were  entombed  at  Bubastis.  Bast  had  the  head  of,  for  ten points,  what  domestic  mammal  whose  names  included  mau  and  mju[mah-ooand“mew”]  in  ancient Egypt, where they were revered?	ANSWER:  domesticcat(accept  common  nicknames,  likekitty-cat  orpussy-cat,feline,  etc.;  accept felis(silvestris)catus)
Directly  before  he  founded  theNew  York  Tribune,  Horace  Greeley  published  a  newspaper  of  this name. Bob Dole’s 1996 presidential campaign controversially returned a $1,000 Republican donation from a group with this name; that group sued the U.S. in 2010 against the military’s “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” policy. A group of Republicans who advocate for LGBT rights is named after, for ten points, what type of frontier house, one of which served as Abraham Lincoln’s birthplace?	ANSWER: logcabins (acceptLogCabinRepublicans; prompt on partial answers)
This agreement amended the rulingInter  caetera. Henry Harrisse claims that Jaime Ferrer devised the  earliest  suggested  answer  to  the  central  question  of  this  agreement.  This  agreement,  which  was authenticated in the city of Setubal, was agreed to a year after the Bulls of Donation were issued by Pope Alexander I. Pedro Cabral’s discovery of Brazil contributed to a boundary passing through South America in, for ten points, what 1494 agreement that established a meridian dividing New World holdings between Spain and Portugal?	ANSWER: Treaty ofTordesillas Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 5
Susan Reverby exposed one of these events that Francis Collins called a “dark chapter in history;” Barack Obama apologized for that event of this type to ́ Alvaro Colom, President of Guatemala. Eunice Rivers organized another of these events, whose victims included Herman Shaw and other men who were told they had “bad blood.” Either a placebo or penicillin was given to the infected subjects of, for ten points, what type of experiment that was conducted at Tuskegee University, in which African-American men were unknowingly given a sexually transmitted disease?	ANSWER: syphilisexperiments (”experiment” not needed after mentioned; prompt on partial answers; prompt on descriptions of experiments on humans (without informed consent), experimenting on humans (who don’t know what’s being done to them), etc.)
The cut-stone Hall of Audience was commissioned by this ruler, who ascended to the throne after his predecessor disappeared on a voyage to explore the limits of the Atlantic Ocean. This ruler invited Ali Kolon  to  his  court  after  conquering  his  homeland  with  the  help  of  his  general,  Sagmandia.  Andalusian architects were hired by this man to build the Djinguereber [jin-guh-rey-ber] Mosque in Timbuktu. For ten points, name this ruler of Mali who ruined economies with highly generous spending during his 1324 hajj to Mecca.	ANSWER: Mansa Musa
This building was commissioned by William Reynolds after the Dreamland fire at Coney Island. A request  from  Texaco  executives  for  an  exclusive  restaurant  led  to  the  creation  of  this  building’s  Cloud Club. This building’s exterior displays gargoyles and a recognizable terraced crown. Upon its completion in  1931,  this  William  van  Alen-designed  building  stood  taller  than  the  Empire  State  Building.  For  ten points,  name  this  Manhattan  skyscraper  of  the  Art  Deco  style  whose  construction  was  funded  by  an American car manufacturer.	ANSWER: ChryslerBuilding
This city’s community of Lenasia is historically home to its Indian population, and its Carlton Centre is the tallest skyscraper on its continent. This city was established following the discovery of gold along the  Witwatersrand.  A  formerly-separate  suburb  of  this  city  is  home  to  Orlando  Stadium,  which  black students marched to in a 1976 protest against the mandatory teaching of Afrikaans. Soweto Township is now part of, for ten points, what city, the most populous in South Africa?	ANSWER: Johannesburg
These  figures  were  alleged  to  have  been  able  to  walk  on  water  with  a  type  of  wooden  shoe  called the “water spider.” One of these figures replicated the enemy’s crest on the lanterns of his troops to gain entrance into that enemy’s army. A famous person of this type nicknamed “Devil” led his lord to safety through Iga province. Hattori Hanzo was a member of this profession, also known as shinobi, who served Tokugawa Ieyasu. For ten points, name these stealthy mercenaries from feudal Japan.	ANSWER:ninja(acceptshinobibefore mentioned) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
A bombardment before this battle was halted by Samuel Graves when theLively’sguns woke him up  from  his  sleep.  In  this  battle,  William  Prescott  withdrew  his  men  to  Cambridge  after  running  out of ammunition. General Thomas Gage was dismissed after this battle, in which Israel Putnam allegedly ordered  his  militia  to  not  fire  “until  you  see  the  whites  of  their  eyes.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  early battle of the Revolutionary War that predominantly took place on Breed’s Hill.	ANSWER: Battle of BunkerHill(accept Battle ofBreed’sHillbefore mentioned)
In a quadrennial festival celebrating this deity, thepeplosrobe was setup like a ship’s sail on a parade cart, while thekanephoroicarried sacred baskets alongside. One epithet of this deity, Glaukopis, refers to silvery  eyes  and  was  later  translated  as  “gray-eyed.”  Tetradrachm  coins  featured  this  goddess’s  face  on one side and the owl, a prominent symbol of her wisdom, on the other. The Parthenon was dedicated to and named for, for ten points, what ancient Greek goddess, the virgin patron deity of Athens?	ANSWER:Athena
During World War II, the United Kingdom invaded this modern day country as part of Operation Fork.  This  country  experienced  the  “mist  hardships”  after  the  eruption  of  the  Laki  fissure.  Thingvellir was the site of this country’s legislative assembly, the Althing, for over a millennia. This country’s Prime Minister, Sigmundr David, resigned in 2016 after it was discovered that he had set up a company in the Virgin  Islands  to  avoid  tax  payments.  For  ten  points,  name  this  European  island  country  with  capital Reykjavik.	ANSWER: Iceland
One depiction of this man shows him walking in front of mountains and clouds en route to a miners strike in Anyuan. He promoted socialist realism and artwork that was “red, light and bright” during his tenure. This man wears blue eyeshadow and rouge in a silkscreen print by Andy Warhol, and his official portrait  by  Ge  Xiaoguang  hangs  on  Tienanmen  Gate.  For  ten  points,  name  this  leader  who  restricted artistic subjects through his Cultural Revolution policies as the first Chairman of Communist China.	ANSWER: MaoZedong (or ChairmanMao)
These people benefited from a form of welfare known as thecura annonae. These people forced the creation  of  the  Twelve  Tables  and  gained  a  measure  of  equality  after  the  Conflict  of  the  Orders.  They often lived in thesuburaneighborhood in tenements known asinsulae. Their elected representative could not be harmed, as he was considered sacrosanct, and could convene their namesake council as a tribune. For ten points, name these ordinary citizens of Rome, often at odds with the upper class patricians.	ANSWER: plebeians (or theplebs) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 5
At this event, Hellen Thorning Schmidt took a controversial selfie with David Cameron and Barack Obama,  and  Obama  controversially  shook  hands  with  Raul  Castro.  Thamsanqa  Jantjie  suffered  a schizophrenic  episode  while  providing  sign  language  translation  at  this  event,  which  included  a  service in  FNB  Stadium,  where  Jacob  Zuma  was  booed.  For  ten  points,  name  this  December  2013  event  that memorialized the life of South Africa’s first black president.	ANSWER: Nelson Mandela’sfuneral(accept equivalents, likeMandela’smemorialservice)
Z. Alexander Looby’s house was bombed for his legal defense of participants in these events. James Lawson was expelled from Vanderbilt University for organizing these events, which led to the creation of SNCC[snick], the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. The most famous of these demonstrations was  conducted  on  February  1,  1960  by  the  Greensboro  Four,  and  they  began  in  Nashville,  targeting drugstores like Walgreen’s and Woolworth’s. For ten points, name this form of peaceful protest that led to the desegregation of lunch counters.	ANSWER: sitins (prompt on general answers about civil rights protests before “protest” is said)
Most of this man’s work was done by assistants like Alex Gardner and Timothy Sullivan, this man was almost killed in the line of fire at Petersburg. One of this man’s works shows Ambrose Burnside lamenting a defeat, whilst another depicts bodies strewn across the Bloody Lane. This man’s works helped inspire one side of the penny coin, and this man’s exhibition “The Dead of Antietam” was praised for depicting the realities of war. For ten points, name this American photographer who took many photos of the Civil War.	ANSWER: Mathew Brady
Frank Chimero suggested that one of this publication’s regular features could consistently include a reference to LinkedIn. Kathryn Schulz’s longread “The Really Big One” about the impending Cascadia subduction  event  won  a  2016  Pulitzer  Prize  for  this  magazine,  as  did  the  work  of  TV  critic  Emily Nussbaum.  David  Remnick  is  the  current  editor  of  this  Cond ́e  Nast  publication,  which  featured  Saul Steinberg’s  “View  of  the  World  from  Ninth  Avenue”  cover  in  1976.  The  phrase  “On  the  Internet, nobody knows you’re a dog” captioned a 1993 cartoon in, for ten points, what weekly magazine based in Manhattan?	ANSWER: The NewYorker
This city lost one battle after the Count d’Arras led a charge of knights crying “Saint George” and a traitor chopped off the hand of its standard-bearer. One leader of this city, whose dominion was southeast of  Modena  and  Lucca,  wroteThe  Triumph  of  the  Crossafter  Alexander  VI  excommunicated  him  for burning ancient texts and paintings in Bonfires of the Vanities. For ten points, name this city ruled by Savonarola, Lorenzo the Magnificent, and Cosimo de Medici.	ANSWER: Republic of Florence(orFirenzeorFlorentineRepublic) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 5
Since 2000, a staggering 46 of these events have occurred during Liverpool’s Grand National. In 2008, Eight Belles finished second to Big Brown, then suffered this fate due to cannon and sesamoid fractures. Two years earlier, a case of laminitis stemming from a leg injury suffered at Pimlico in Baltimore led to another of these events, though it occurred months after the Preakness Stakes. For ten points, name this athletic tragedy that befell Kentucky Derby winner Barbaro after shattering his right hind leg.	ANSWER: euthanization(or other synonyms fordeath) of a racehorse
One leader of this country was filmed having his ears cut off while warlord Prince Johnson drank a Budweiser. During this country’s first civil war, Joshua Milton Blahyi led an armed division of children known  as  the  “Butt  Naked  brigade.”  That  civil  war  ended  with  the  1997  election  of  Charles  Taylor. Alongside Guinea and Sierra Leone, this country was at the centre of the West African Ebola outbreak. For ten points, name this African country, originally established as a country for free slaves, whose capital is Monrovia.	ANSWER: Liberia
Kepler predicted the 1631 occurrence of this event, but it was not visible from Europe. One of these in 1769 was studied from Tahiti during James Cook’s first voyage to Australia. During these astronomical events,  which  occur  in  pairs  eight  years  apart,  spectroscopy  can  detect  an  atmosphere  with  much  less sulfuric acid than commonly believed. For ten points, name these events in which a certain planet crosses between the Earth and Sun.	ANSWER: transits ofVenus(acceptoccultationoftheSunbyVenusoreclipseoftheSunby VenusorsolareclipsebyVenus;  prompt  on  partial  answers,  but  do  not  accept  or  prompt  on  solar eclipse alone; accept descriptions of VenuspassinginfrontoftheSun(as viewed from Earth) before FTP)
This man is the subject of a biography by Robert Wilson subtitled “An American Life,"  and  this  man  funded  a  series  of  renovation  projects  in  Connecticut  that  were  part  of his “profitable philanthropy.” This man once testified  against  William  Mumler,  who  was considered a “spirit photographer.” This businessman once offered to provide $500 to anyone who could demonstrate the ability to speak with the dead and became known as the prince of the “humbug" hoax. Claiming “a sucker is born every minute," for ten points, who was this businessman who founded a circus with James Anthony Bailey?	ANSWER: Phineas Taylor Barnum (or P.T. Barnum; accept Barnum and Bailey)
This  person  expressed  their  appreciation  for  Cox’s  Orange  Pippin   apples   and Wensleydale  cheese  in  the  essay In  Defence  of  English  Cooking.  One  book  by  this  author notes  that  mining  households  spend  only  "ten  pence  a  week  on  green  vegetables  and  ten pence  half-penny  on  milk...,  and  nothing  on  fruit."  That  book  by  this  author  was  written after  studying  the  working  class  in  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire.  For  ten  points,  name  this English  author  of The Road to Wigan Pier who  coined  authoritarian  psychology  terms  like "thoughtcrime" and "doublethink" in the novel 1984.	ANSWER: George Orwell (or Eric Arthur Blair)
This body of water was described by António Galvão as a “dragon’s tail.” Philip Parker  King  spent  five  years  surveying  the  area  surrounding  this  body  of  water,  and  for thousands of years, indigenous groups, such as the Kawésqar, inhabited this body of water. The  Treaty  of  Peace  and  Friendship  of  1984  between  two  bordering  countries  recognized this body of water as a demilitarized zone. For ten points, what "Strait" on the southern tip of South America is named for a Portuguese explorer?	ANSWER: Strait(s) of Magellan (or Estrecho de Magallanes; accept Estrecho de Todos los Santos or Strait(s) of All Saints before "explorer" is mentioned)
Carlos Salinas's tenure as president of this company included the arrest of the union boss  José  Hernández  Galicia,  who  was  using  violent  force  to  coerce  the  syndicates  of workers. Following the creation of this company, former Secretary of Agriculture Saturnino Cedillo  [[seh-DEE-yoh]]  declared  the  sitting  government  illegitimate  and  revolted  from  his power  base.  Citing  Article  27  of  the  Constitution  of  1917,  Lázaro  Cárdenas  ordered  the creation of this company after seizing Anglo-Dutch and American holdings. The national oil company of Mexico is, for ten points, what state enterprise created in the 1930s?	ANSWER: PEMEX (accept Petróleos Mexicanos)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 7
As  the  head  of  Charles  University,  this  man  affirmed  his  nation's  neutrality  in  the Western  Schism.  This  man  is  credited  with  developing  a  dot  above  a  diacritic  which  later became  the háček [[HAH-chek]]  for  a  language  he  helped  to  codify  in  his Orthographia bohemica. While he believed in transubstantiation, this man was heavily influenced by John Wycliffe and was condemned as a heretic at the Council of Constance. For ten points, name this Bohemian theologian who was burned at the stake and names a series of wars with the Holy Roman Empire fought after his death.	ANSWER: Jan Hus (or John Huss; or John Hus; accept Hussite; or Hussite Wars)
In  a  Supreme  Court  case,  this  treaty  was  deemed “useless” by Chief Justice James Pendergast. The similar Batman’s Treaty was signed in a nearby country five years before this  treaty,  in  which  over  500  representatives  of  one  side  were  presented  with  a  non- English    version.    In    addition    to    working    on    its central  country’s  Declaration  of Independence,  James  Busby  helped  draft  this  treaty  with  William  Hobson.  Negotiated  in 1840  in  a  country  containing  Mount  Cook,  for  ten  points,  what  was  this  treaty  through which lands were ceded by the Maori?	ANSWER: Treaty of Waitangi [[wye-TAHN-gee]] (or Te Tiriti o Waitangi)
This campaign was announced with a tweet stating, “We must now realize the promise of America by trusting God, unifying our vision and building our future.” Over 600 petition  signatures  from  this campaign were claimed to be fraudulent due to “nearly identical handwriting and others [lacking] complete addresses.” Michelle Tidball, a preacher from Wyoming, was selected to be the running mate for this campaign's candidate. For ten points, what campaign for the Birthday Party was announced by a Chicago rapper to run for president of the United States?	ANSWER: Kanye West 2020 presidential campaign (accept either Kanye or West; accept Ye for President; accept obvious equivalents)
This  man  narrowly  avoided  the  same  fate  as  Elijah  Lovejoy  at  a  speech  given  by George Thompson. A faction led by Lewis Tappan split off from this man’s organization over the election of Abby Kelley. This leader publicly burned a copy of the Constitution in protest, calling it “a covenant of death.” This man was a close ally of Wendell Phillips, who succeeded him  as  president  of  the  American  Anti-Slavery  Society.  For  ten  points,  name  this  fierce abolitionist and orator who published The Liberator.	ANSWER: William Lloyd Garrison  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 7
The  last  person  to  receive  this  award  was  Hayley  Mills  for  her  performance  in  the 1960  film Pollyanna. This award was established after Jackie Cooper’s performance in the film Skippy lost to Lionel Barrymore. Bob Hope called this award the “Oscarette” when presenting it to Margaret O’Brien. First won by Shirley Temple in 1934, for ten points, what now-discontinued  award  recognized  child  actors  and  actresses  for  their  performances  in film?	ANSWER: Academy Juvenile Award (accept Juvenile Oscar; accept Juvenile Academy Award; accept Oscarette before mentioned)
In reference to this politician, a billionaire once said, “Please don’t call the manager on me.” This politician claimed that a certain quality “has been part of my story, I guess, since the day I was born." Elon Musk once compared this politician to his “friend’s angry mom” and referred to her as “Karen” while noting his high tax contributions. During his first presidential   campaign,  Donald  Trump  repeatedly  called  this  woman  “Pocahontas”  in reference to her claims of being part-Native American. For ten points, name this progressive Democratic Massachusetts senator.	ANSWER: Elizabeth Warren (or Elizabeth Ann Warren; accept Elizabeth Ann Herring)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 7
During  an  engagement  in  this  battle,  a  British  officer  said  to  William  Birdwood, "You're  not  fighting  Bashi-Bazouks  now"  while  defending  Pozières  [[poh-ZYEHR]].  In  his book The World Crisis,  Winston  Churchill  described  the  dismissal  of  this  battle's  planners Ferdinand Foch [[FOHSH]] and Joseph Joffree. The Mark I [[ONE]] Tank was first deployed at  this  battle,  which  was  launched  to  relieve  pressure  from  Verdun.  For  ten  points,  name this  1916  World  War  One  battle  named  for  a  river  in  Picardy,  France,  at  which  the  British sustained 420,000 casualties.	ANSWER: Battle of the Somme (accept Somme Offensive)
Alexander Martin composed a funerary poem for this man after he was killed at the Battle  of  Germantown.  This  man's  brother,  Abner,  served  as  the  second  governor  of  North Carolina, while this man served in the North Carolina General Assembly before becoming an officer.  This man,  who  heavily  opposed  the  Regulator  movement,  is  the  namesake  of  a city that  was  originally  a  fort defending  the Cumberland  River  valley.  Leading  North  Carolina's soldiers  in  the  Pennsylvania  campaign,  for  ten  points,  who  was  this  Revolutionary  War general who names a large Tennessee city?	ANSWER: Francis Nash (accept Nashville)
This  man  narrated  the  documentary He Is Not Dimon to You,  which  was  distributed by  this  man's  Anti-Corruption  Foundation.  This  man  called  his  country's  largest  political faction  "a  party  of  crooks  and  thieves."  After  recovering  from  being  poisoned,  this  man returned  home  from  Berlin  only  to  be  imprisoned  months  later.  For  ten  points,  name  this Russian  opposition  leader  described  by The Wall Street Journal as  "the  man  Vladimir  Putin fears most."	ANSWER: Alexei Navalny
One person with this title had his deceased predecessor tried in the Cadaver Synod [[SIN-ahd]]   before   casting   him   into   a   nearby   river.   That   predecessor   with   this   title, Formosus,  was  later  reported  to  have  performed  miracles  along  the  banks  of  the  Tiber.  A prophecy regarding people with this title dictates that the last one named Peter will oversee the destruction of the "City of Seven Hills." For ten points, what title is given to the "holder of the Keys of Heaven," also known as the Bishop of Rome?	ANSWER: Pope (accept Bishop of Rome before mentioned; accept Supreme Pontiff or Roman Pontiff)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 6
The first scenario of this man's campaign in Age of Empires II [[TWO]] is marked by Crucible. That scenario’s introduction claims that this man's group settled at the “head of the Onon River.” A work subtitled “Clan of the Grey Wolf” appears in a Koei series named for this  man,  in  which  players  can  control  a  faction  led  by  Jamukha.  In  one  game,  this  man claims, “It is easy to conquer the world on horseback.” For ten points, name this ruler, whose Civilization 6 leader ability is Mongol Horde.	ANSWER: Genghis Khan (accept Temujin; accept pronunciation as [[GEN-giss]] or [[CHEN- giss]])
A visit to the White House to celebrate this period resulted in a viral dancing video featuring  the  106-year  old  Virginia  McLaurin.  Maulana  Karenga  spoke  during  the  first London  iteration  of  this  period.  At  West  Virginia  State  University,  a  2020  convocation  for this  annual  period  included  a  keynote  given  by  DeRay  McKesson.  A  predecessor  of  this annual  period  was  only  a  week  long  and  included  the  birthdays  of  Abraham  Lincoln and Frederick   Douglass.   For   ten   points,   name   this   celebration   observed   every   February recognizing African-American achievements.	ANSWER: Black History Month (prompt on partial answers)
This country contains the world’s largest ship graveyard in its city  of  Nouadhibou [[nwah-DEE-boo]],  which  was  previously  named  for  the  French  Minister  of  the  Colonies, Eugène  Étienne.  This  country's  railroad  was  home  to  the  Choum  [[SHOOM]]  Tunnel,  a "monument to European stupidity in Africa." This country's Banc d’Arguin [[dahr-GAHN]] is the  setting  of  Théodore  Géricault's  [[zheh-ree-COHS]] The  Raft  of  the  Medusa.  The  White Moors,   or   Bidan,   enslaved   many   of   this   country's   Haratines,   even   after   slavery   was abolished in 1960. Nouakchott [[NWAHK-shaht]] is the capital of, for ten points, what West African nation?	ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Mauritania
Herodotus [[heh-RAH-duh-tis]] said this man died fighting the Massageteans [[mah- sah-geh-TEE-uns]] along the Syr Darya, while another account said he was killed by Queen Tomyris. At the Battle of Thymbra, this man defeated the army of Croesus [[KREE-sus]] and conquered the Lydian kingdom. This man's capital was at Pasargadae [[pah-SAR-gah-deh]], and he established an administrative system of satraps. This ruler's namesake Cylinder tells the story of his repatriation of the Jews after the Babylonian captivity. For ten points, name this founder of the Achaemenid [[ah-KEE-muh-nid]] Persian Empire.	ANSWER: Cyrus the Great (accept Cyrus II of Persia; accept Cyrus the Elder)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 6
This  man's  half-brother,  Edward,  was  killed  at  Corfe  Castle.  This  man,  who  created juries  in  his Wantage  [[WAHN-tidge]]  law code,  paid gafol tributes  for  peace  on  the  advice of Sigeric the Serious. At Andover, this man sponsored the confirmation of Olaf Tryggvason as  a  Christian.  Gunhilde,  and  possibly  Pallig  Tokesen,  were  killed  in  the  St.  Brice's  Day Massacre,  which  this  man  ordered,  prompting  an  invasion  by  Sweyn  [[SVEN]]  Forkbeard. Losing  to  the  Vikings  at  Maldon,  for  ten  points,  who  was  this  "poorly  advised"  King  of England?	ANSWER: Æthelred the Unready
This president claimed that the passage of a Civil Rights Bill would be an act “against the white race.” Landowners with property valuations exceeding $20,000 were surprisingly pardoned  after  being  barred from giving oaths of allegiance under this man’s presidency. This  one-term  president  was  a  former  military  governor  of  Tennessee  who  many  thought would  engage  in  Radical  Reconstruction.  For  ten  points,  name  this  17th  president  who previously served as vice president under Abraham Lincoln.	ANSWER: Andrew Johnson   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 6
One man with this surname published an abolitionist newspaper titled True American. That politician was  the  cousin  of  another  man  of  this  surname  who,  in  1816,  was  made  president  of  the  American Colonization Society. That man with this surname served three terms as Speaker of the House, including one in which he made a “corrupt bargain” with John Quincy Adams to sway the election of 1824. For ten points, give the surname of the prominent Kentucky politicians Cassius and Henry.	ANSWER:Clay
At this battle, a sudden rainstorm rendered many of the crossbows of Carlo Grimaldi’s contingent unusable. One commander in this battle refused to come to the aid of the Black Prince, saying “let the boy win his spurs” as he resisted an attack in which John the Blind was killed. This defeat for Philip VI led to the capture of Calais. For ten points, name this 1346 battle in which the English longbow was used to great effect against the French.	ANSWER: Battle ofCrecy
This  leader  first  rose  to  prominence  as  mayor  of  Davao  City.  After  UN  criticism  of  extrajudicial killings by this leader, he responded by threatening to withdraw his nation from the UN. In September, 2016, this leader expressed a desire to kill as many people as Hitler did in the Holocaust. After his election, this leader launched an all out war on drugs, encouraging the population to kill drug addicts and drug dealers. For ten points, name this President of the Philippines.	ANSWER: Rodrigo “Rody”Duterte(prompt on “Digong”)
As  a  colony,  this  modern-day  state  passed  the  Halifax  Resolves,  the  first  document  advocating  for independence  from  Britain.  The  building  of  the  opulent  Tryon  Palace  in  this  state’s  city  of  New  Bern sparked  the  War  of  the  Regulation.  Despite  heavy  losses,  Charles  Cornwallis  led  the  British  to  victory over Nathaniel Greene’s forces at a battle in this state. For the point, name this state where the Battle of Guilford Courthouse took place in Greensboro.	ANSWER:North Carolina
A 1930 opera based on a man born in this city had a libretto written by Paul Claudel. That Verdi opera  is  named  for  the  first  doge  of  this  city,  Simon  Boccanegra.  A  Darius  Milhaud  [mee-yohd]  opera focusing on a man born in this city uses Spanish themes to symbolize the title character’s departure from Cadiz. For ten points, name this Italian city, the birthplace of the subject of the opera Christophe Colomb.	ANSWER:Genoa(acceptGenova) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
An Aksumite invasion of this city supposedly failed when the lead war elephant refused to enter it. A group of militants led by Juhayman al-Otaybi laid siege to a building in this city in 1979. This city was briefly the capital of the Kingdom of Hejaz after the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. The Quraysh tribe of this city was defeated in the Battle of the Trench. For ten points, name this city at which the annual “stoning of the devil” ceremony occurs at the Kaaba.	ANSWER:Mecca, Saudi Arabia
After  his  most  celebrated  invention,  this  man  engaged  in  a  debate  over  whether  a  “micro”  or “monolithic”  version  of  a  program  was  superior.  That  debate  was  between  this  man  and  Andrew Tanenbaum.  After  coming  under  fire  for  using  BitKeeper  this  man  developed  a  free  version  called  Git. Red Hat offers a business version of an operating system based around this man’s kernel. For ten points, name this developer and namesake of the open-source operating system Linux.	ANSWER: Linus BenedictTorvalds
The ratified version of this agreement included protections for land on which both Peter Hargous and A.G. Sloo planned to build a railroad. That railroad secured in this agreement was never built but had been intended to cross the Isthmus of Tehauntepec. Ownership of the Mesilla Valley was resolved in this agreement which had been left undecided at the earlier negotiations to end the Mexican-American War. For ten points, name this American land acquisition agreement with Mexico.	ANSWER:Gadsden Purchase(acceptGadsden Treaty, acceptTreatyofMesillabefore mentioned)
In 1797 a hypnotist from Goa was sent to a prison off the coast of this city where wealthy inhabitants could  afford  rooms  called  pistoles  which  were  larger  than  typical  cells.  A  fort  built  during  the  reign  of Francis I served as the site of this city’s basilica Notre-Dame de la Garde. Abbe Faria and Edmond Dantes were imprisoned in the Chateau d’If [DEEF] off this city in The Count of Monte Cristo. For ten points, name this city in the south of France in what was once the ancient Greek colony of Massalia.	ANSWER:Marseille, France
This politician controversially used the phrase “coffee-house babble” to describe a report of foreign atrocities, but he regardless sent Lord Salisbury to negotiate at the Constantinople Conference. This man, who  led  the  Young  England  movement  after  breaking  with  Robert  Peel,  signed  the  Royal  Titles  Act, conferring the title of “Empress of India” upon Queen Victoria who favored this man more than his liberal rival. For ten points, name this 19th century British prime minister, the rival of William Gladstone.	ANSWER: BenjaminDisraeli, 1st Earl of Beaconsfield (accept Earl ofBeaconsfield) Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 6
One of these people served under Felix Dzerzhinsky before becoming a defendant at the Trial of the Twenty-One.  Another  one  of  these  people  proposed  the  Katyn  Massacre.  Another  one  of  these  people names  a  period  of  political  repression  he  presided  over  and  is  nicknamed  “The  Vanishing  Commissar” after he was airbrushed out of official pictures. Genrikh Yagoda, Lavrenty Beria, and Nikolai Yezhov all served in, for ten points, what position, the head of Soviet intelligence under Stalin?	ANSWER: headoftheNKVD(acceptPeople’sCommissarforInternalAffairs, accept equivalents for “head”, do not accept or prompt on “head of the KGB” or “head of the Cheka” or “head of the GPU”)
Charles Floyd was the only member of this group to die, likely the result of a ruptured appendix. The  path  of  this  group  was  traced  due  to  leftover  mercury  in  the  soil,  a  side  effect  of  mercury-based, high-powered laxatives called “Dr. Rush’s Bilious Pills.” Jean Baptiste Charbonneau was born into this group, the son of a French-Canadian prisoner and a Shoshone woman. Sacajawea was a member of, for ten points, what group tasked by Thomas Jefferson with exploring the newly purchased Louisiana Territory?	ANSWER: LewisandClarkExpedition (acceptCorpsofDiscovery)
This  dynasty  won  an  early  victory  at  the  Battle  of  the  Zab.  This  dynasty  was  established  in  a revolution led by the Persian general Abu Muslim. One ruler from this dynasty gave Charlemagne gifts including a clock and an elephant. That ruler was Harun al-Rashid, who may have established the House of Wisdom to house his library. For ten points, name this caliphate whose capital of Baghdad was sacked by the Mongols in 1258, the successors of the Umayyads.	ANSWER: AbbasidCaliphate
A strike of workers gathering this resource in Anzin inspired Zola’s novel Germinal. The first railroads in Continental Europe transported this resource from Saint-Etienne. Iron production was greatly increased by substituting wood with a processed form of this resource. The “sea” form of this resource was used in locomotives and is graded between this resource’s anthracite and bituminous forms. Coke is a form of, for ten points, what carbon-based rock which fueled the Industrial Revolution?	ANSWER: coal(prompt on lignite, prompt on anthracite, bitumen, or coke before mention)
A holder of this posistion called the U.S. “more aTale of Two Citiesthan a shining city on a hill” as the keynote speaker at the 1984 DNC. Another holder of this position defeated Carl Paladino in 2010 and established the Excelsior scholarship for his state’s public universities. That holder of this non-municipal position called Jeff Bezos to attempt to salvage a deal that would create an Amazon HQ2 in Long Island City. For ten points, name this gubernatorial position held by Mario and Andrew Cuomo.	ANSWER: governorofNewYork Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
This  composer  wrote  a  long,  one  movement  work  dedicated  to  Robert  Schumann,  an  example  of double function form. This composer, who wrote piano transcriptions for all nine Beethoven symphonies, pioneered the genre of symphonic poem with works such asLes Pr ́eludes. In the 1840s, the popularity of this composer throughout Europe led to a namesake “mania.” For ten points, name this composer of the Mephisto Waltzes,Hungarian Rhapsodies, andTranscendental Etudes.	ANSWER: Franz Liszt
The leader of one side in this battle rejected Alfred Terry’s offer of gattling guns, preferring to stay a mobile force. During this battle, William W. Cooke sent a “last message” begging Frederick Benteen to quickly “Bring Packs.” Myles Keogh’s horse, Comanche, was one of the only surviving members of the US military at the end of this battle. For ten points, name this 1876 battle of the Great Sioux War, the last stand of the 7th Calvary under George Custer.	ANSWER: Battle ofLittleBighorn(accept Battle of theGreasyGrass; acceptCuster’sLastStand before “last” is read)
Lu Haodong was executed for leading an insurgency in this city, the first of a series of uprisings prior to the Xinhai Revolution. This city’s Thirteen Factories became integral to a trade monopoly run by the cohongguilds, which served this city’s namesake system. Lin Zexu’s attempt to destroy the opium trade in  this  city  prompted  Britain  to  send  an  expedition  to  nearby  Hong  Kong.  The  First  Opium  War  was sparked in, for ten points, what coastal city that names a major Chinese dialect?	ANSWER: Canton(orGuangzhou, do not accept or prompt on “Guangdong”)
This speech begins by asking the listener to “avoid the impulse to live only for today.” The deliverer of  this  speech  defended  his  increased  funding  of  scientific  research  but  warned  that  public  policy  could become captive to a “scientific-technological elite.” This speech notes that, at one time, plowshares could be relied on to make swords, but that this is no longer the case. For ten points, name this final speech by the 34th President of the United States which warned against the rise of the military-industrial complex.	ANSWER: Eisenhower’sfarewelladdress
Lynn Hunt argued that these concepts grew out of a shift in mentality influenced by reading popular novels. John Locke argued the divinity of humans as God’s creations formed the basis for the natural kind of these concepts. One work named for these concepts argued that these concepts could never be revoked by government, which was instead supposed to protect them, and was written by Thomas Paine. A 1948 UN Declaration tried to formulate, for ten points, what basic universal freedoms?	ANSWER: Human rights Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 6
A member of this party earned the nickname “Sockless Jerry” in a election against J.R. Hallowell. This  party  nominated  Thomas  Watson  for  vice  president  in  a  temporary  alliance  with  the  Democrats. The  NFAIU,  a  precursor  to  this  political  party,  issued  the  Ocala  Demands,  calling  for  the  abolition  of national banks. This party outlined its beliefs in the Omaha Platform. The Farmers Alliance grew into, for ten points, what political party that rallied against railroads in the late 19th century?	ANSWER: People’sParty (orPopulistParty)
This treaty’s signing was delayed by the policy of “no war and no peace” in an attempt to buy time for more revolutions to occur. One side was forced to sign the unfavorable terms of this treaty after they were targeted in Operation Faustschlag. The Treaty of Rapallo annulled all territorial claims of this treaty, which included recognizing the independence of Ukraine and ceding the Baltic States to Germany. For ten points, name this harsh treaty, a separate peace that took Russia out of World War I.	ANSWER: Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
The  role  of  communism  in  three  insurrections  within  this  military  force  was  investigated  by  the Mainguy  Report.  Civilians  serving  in  this  force  formed  the  “Sheep  Dog”  branch  during  World  War  II. Robert Borden curtailed the funding of this force, which opponents of Wilfrid Laurier dubbed a “tin pot” endeavor. A command center of this force was destroyed by the explosion of theMont Blancin 1917. The Halifax dockyards once maintained, for ten points, what force that worked with the American and British navies to protect Atlantic convoys?	ANSWER: CanadianNavy(prompt on partial answers, like “the Navy” or “the armed forces of Canada”)
Photographer Cindy Sherman created a series of these works called “Untitled Film Stills.” A figure wearing a tunic adorned with the Cross of Santiago at the left hand side ofLas  Meninasis this type of artwork. Monkeys, necklaces of thorns, and hummingbirds appear in many of these works by Frida Kahlo, whoseBroken Columnwas painted after she underwent spinal surgery. A bandaged ear is featured in one of these works by Vincent Van Gogh. For ten points, name this type of artwork that depicts its creator.	ANSWER: self-portraits (accept descriptions ofportraitsof theartist)
In the first crisis dissolved by this presidential doctrine, negotiator Robert Murphy led a delegation that  carried  out  Operation  Blue  Bat,  assisting  the  government  of  the  Maronite  Christian  Camille Chamoun.  The  phrase  “international  communism”  was  central  to  this  doctrine,  which  expanded  the potential  of  intervention  beyond  Soviet-driven  military  conflicts.  For  ten  points,  name  this  presidential doctrine, first invoked in Lebanon in 1958, that was outlined by a former World War II general.	ANSWER: EisenhowerDoctrine Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
Members  of  this  class  often  employed  a  small  group  of  bodyguards  and  assistants  known  as  a kashindan.  Outcast  members  of  this  class  were  given  the  labeltozamaand  kept  under  control  by  the shimpanandfudai.  Beginning  in  1642,  all  members  of  this  class  were  required  to  adopt  the  policy  of alternate attendance, strengthening control over them. Having an estate valued at 10,000kokuwas needed to qualify for this title under thehansystem. For ten points, name these feudal lords who served under a shogun in Japan.	ANSWER: daimyo(prompt on generic descriptions of feudal lords (in Japan))
A raid by Robert Seales prompted this city to build the Castillo de San Marcos. In an attack on this city, Fort Mos ́e was captured by forces under James Oglethorpe. After Francis Drake led a 1586 attack on this city, he sailed for Roanoke. The founder of this city massacred the nearby Fort Caroline, which had been founded by Jean Ribault and his Huguenot followers. Pedro Mend ́ez de Avil ́es founded, for ten points, what Florida city, the oldest continuously occupied European settlement in the United States?	ANSWER: SaintAugustine
Thomas Willis and Nicolaus Steno independently published groundbreaking texts on these things in the 1660s. Camillo Golgi and Santiago Cajal [ca-HAL] revolutionized the study of these things through their use of a staining procedure. Hippocrates and Aristotle disagreed on the function of this object, the latter believing that they were for cooling blood. Thomas Harvey took this object from Albert Einstein without permission. For ten points, name this body part that is controversially operated on in a lobotomy.	ANSWER: brains (accept any specific region of the brain, likeprefrontallobeafter “lobotomy” is read)
This  was  the  easternmost  state  home  to  the  possibly  Crypto-Muslim  Ben  Ishmael  Tribe.  George Rogers  Clark  won  a  Revolutionary  War  battle  at  this  state’s  Fort  Vincennes,  and  this  state’s  city  of Muncie  was  the  subject  of  the  1920s  Middletown  Studies.  Another  Revolutionary  War  hero  names  this state’s  city  of  Fort  Wayne.  The  Wabash  River  forms  the  western  border  of,  for  ten  points,  what  state, home to the economically depressed cities of Gary and East Chicago?	ANSWER: Indiana
This  man’s  transgressions  were  documented  by  Jules  Marchal,  whose  research  formed  the  basis of Adam Hochschild’s book[this  man’s]  Ghost. Gennaro Rubino tried to assassinate this man, who was granted a lease by the British on the Lado Enclave in exchange for land that they could use to complete the Cape to Cairo Railway. This ruler used the Force Publique to maintain commodity quotas in one of his colonies. The Congo Free State was the personal property of, for ten points, what king of Belgium?	ANSWER: LeopoldII(prompt on Leopold) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 6
A slave named Ben claimed to have found this man’s dead body surrounded by sixteen corpses, one of  which  had  this  man’s  knife  stuck  in  it.  This  man’s  loss  in  an  1835  Congressional  election  prompted him to tell his statesmen that “they might go to hell, and I would go to Texas.” This man joined William Travis in disobeying an order by Sam Houston to abandon a San Antonio mission. For ten points, name this man who died defending the Alamo, a legendary frontiersman from Tennessee.	ANSWER: David “Davy” Crockett
The 1957 Wolfenden Commission proposed eliminating laws punishing this crime. The Labouchere Amendment  led  to  an  imprisonment  in  Reading  Gaol[”reddingjail”]  for  committing  this  crime.  Laws against “buggery” were frequently used to arrest individuals for this crime. Ireland was the first country to legalize this crime by the popular vote. Two years after being convicted for this crime, a war hero ate a cyanide-laced apple to commit suicide. Alan Turing was prosecuted for, for ten points, what romantic crime?	ANSWER: homosexuality(accept  equivalents,  such  as  beinggay;  acceptsodomy;  acceptbuggery before mentioned)
The creation of this route was documented in the Kaiheji. Older predecessors of this route include the  Hong  Gou  and  Han  Gou.  The  city  of  Kaifeng  became  a  major  commercial  hub  due  to  this  route. Disruptions along this route could be seen as a loss of the Mandate of Heaven. Work on this route began during the Spring and Autumn Period, and it was fully connected during the Sui Dynasty to ship grain and expedite trade. For ten points, name this great work of Chinese infrastructure that starts in Beijing and connects the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers, the longest canal in the world.	ANSWER: Beijing-Hangzhou GrandCanal
A  controversially  ugly  skyscraper  in  this  city  stands  at  30  St.  Mary  Axe  and  is  nicknamed  for  its similarity to a type of pickle. Renzo Piano designed a skyscraper in this city’s Southwark borough known as The Shard. A landmark known as this city’s Eye was built to commemorate the millennium in 2000; that Ferris wheel became a common sight in television coverage of the 2012 Summer Olympics. For ten points, name this city whose less modern architecture includes Westminster Palace, the meeting place of British Parliament.	ANSWER: London
A claim involving this woman was popularized by a 1974 biography written by Fawn M. Brodie and was further developed in the late 20th and early 21st centuries by Annette Gordon-Reed. This woman’s children, including Beverley, Madison, and Eston, have no records of a second parent in a contemporary Farm Book. This woman accompanied the girl Polly to live in France for five years beginning in 1784. For ten points, name this slave who probably had several children with Thomas Jefferson.	ANSWER: Sally Hemings Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
This  author  used  the  couplet  “Ready,  be  ready  to  meet  the  storm!  /  Riflemen,  riflemen,  riflemen form!” to end all four stanzas of his poem “The War.” In another poem by this author, a group travels to, and then back from, the “mouth of hell.” That poem by this author asks “Was there a man dismay’d?” because a group of soldiers are unaware of a blunder made by their commander. For ten points, name this poet who wrote about a doomed assault made by six hundred cavalrymen in “The Charge of the Light Brigade.”	ANSWER: Alfred, Lord Tennyson
The first time that Rome attacked Illyria was meant to stop a supporter of these people named Teuta. These people were supposed to help guide the slaves of Spartacus to safety, but deserted them prior to the Battle of the Siler River. Pompey was granted great powers to fight these people in the Lex Gabinia, and a number of these people were crucified after they held a young Julius Caesar for ransom. Cilicia was a Roman-era stronghold of, for ten points, what seafaring marauders?	ANSWER: pirates
Suetonius noted how this figure owned a “collar of stones” and a “troop of slaves and furniture.” To disprove a prophecy made by Thrasyllus of Mendes, grain barges were used to create a bridge across the Bay of Baiae for this figure to travel on. This figure, who had a name meaning “swift,” was owned by the brother of Drusilla; because that man was assassinated in 41 AD, this figure never ended up becoming consul. For ten points, name this horse that was beloved by Caligula.	ANSWER: Incitatus(prompt on Caligula’s horse before “horse” is read)
The first member of this group wrote a poetry collection,Asa di Var, that was compiled by another member of this group, Arjan Dev. The tenth member of this group initiated the five Panj Pyare into the Khalsa. Members of this group include Amar Das and a man born Gobind Rai. The final member of this group is, and will eternally be, the Adi Granth, a religious text. Nanak was the first of, for ten points, what group of 11 sources of guidance for Sikhs?	ANSWER: Sikh gurus (prompt on Sikhs before mentioned)
One holder of this position tried to stop Richard Olney from stopping the Pullman Strike. John Peter Altgeld held this position in the 19th century, while Otto Kerner and George Ryan held it in the 20th century.  While  serving  in  this  position,  Rod  Blagojevich [blah-goy-eh-vich]  was  arrested  for  corruption related to the “sale” of President-elect Obama’s vacated Senate seat. Bruce Rauner currently holds, for ten points, what leadership position in the “Land of Lincoln?”	ANSWER: GovernorofIllinois(prompt on partial answers) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 6
This location is the setting of an “Outdoor Scene” often paired with “The Pond” and “Halloween” by Charles Ives. One section of this region was dedicated on October 9, 1985, is a short walk from the Dakota apartment complex, and features a tile mosaic around the word “Imagine.” A 1981 benefit concert to  revive  this  location  brought  500,000  people  to  it  to  listen  to  “Mrs.  Robinson”  and  other  Simon  and Garfunkel  songs.  The  Strawberry  Fields  memorial  to  John  Lennon  is  located  in,  for  ten  points,  what landmark green space designed by Frederick Law Olmstead in Manhattan?	ANSWER: CentralPark(acceptCentralParkintheDark)
This man’s step-grandfather, White Man Runs Him, served as a scout for Custer’s forces prior to the Battle of the Little Bighorn. This man published a book on buffalo jump techniques and, while serving in World War II, managed to steal 50 horses belonging to the SS, an exploit that helped this 2009 recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom become a War Chief. For ten points, name this Plains Indians War Chief of the Crow nation who died in 2016 at the age of 102.	ANSWER: Joseph MedicineCrowHigh Bird
The  scope  of  this  amendment  was  expanded  by  a  case  filed  against  a  worker  who  was  paid  an advance of $15 by the Riverside Company, then quit shortly thereafter. James Mitchell Ashley introduced a  bill  that  was  rolled  into  this  amendment.  The  aforementionedBailey v. Alabamastrengthened  this amendment, whose purpose was undermined by the rise of sharecropping as a replacement for indentured servitude. For ten points, name this civil rights amendment, ratified in 1865, that abolished slavery.	ANSWER: 13th Amendment
This man “placed his dithyrambs in the hands of the poet of Isoline” in a letter signed “Dionysus;” that letter is one of his Wahnzettel[vahn-zettel], or Madness Letters. According to legend, after this man witnessed a horse being flogged in Turin, he ran to protect it and collapsed at its side. After this man’s death, his sister Elizabeth compiled and published the unfinishedThe Will to Power, which describes the problem  of  nihilism,  a  philosophy  that  this  thinker’s  earlier  works  explained  was  the  end  result  of  the death of God. For ten points, name this German philosopher who wroteThe Gay Science.	ANSWER: Friedrich Nietzsche
One of this man’s works ends with a prayer asking whether this is the “fullness of Joy” that the Lord promises. That work by this man opens with an “exhortation of the mind to the contemplation of God,” who this man defined as a “being greater than which none can be conceived” in what is now considered the original ontological argument for God’s existence. TheProslogionwas written by, for ten points, what early 12th century Archbishop of Canterbury who is often considered the founder of Scholasticism?	ANSWER: Saint Anselmof Canterbury Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 6
This  man  built  a  fort  on  Aethelney  hill  after  being  surprised  in  an  attack  on  Chippenham.  While hiding  in  the  Somerset  marshes,  this  man  is  said  to  have  been  scolded  for  letting  a  bunch  of  cakes burn;  that  story  was  related  by  his  biographer,  Bishop  Asser.  This  ruler  ordered  a  fyrd  to  muster  on Whitsuntide  at  Egbert’s  Stone.  This  victor  of  the  Battle  of  Ashdown  fortified  his  country  with  burhs, and successfully defended his kingdom against the Great Heathen Army. For ten points, name this ruler, enemy of Guthrum of Mercia and king of Wessex, known as “the Great.”	ANSWER: Alfredthe Great
Jean-Jacque Maimoni was killed by friendly fire in this event. In carrying out this event, Wilfred Bose protested that he was not a Nazi. During this event, Dora Bloch was allowed to leave due to illness, then was killed anyway. Jonathan Netanyahu was the IDF’s only fatality in this event; others killed included two  members  of  the  Popular  Front  for  the  Liberation  of  Palestine,  who  had  hijacked  Air  France  Flight 139. For ten points, name this July 4, 1976 counter-terrorism operation in which over 100 hostages were rescued from an airport in Uganda.	ANSWER: Entebberaid (accept OperationEntebbeor OperationThunderbolt)
Sebastiano  Venier  rose  to  prominence  after  this  battle,  where  one  side  lost  a  force  of  irreplaceable composite archers. A bronze sculpture of Neptune was crafted to bear similarities to one admiral in this battle, which was preceded by the siege of Famagusta. The winning side formed wings flanking the flagship Real[ray-AHL]. Andrea Doria and Miguel Cervantes fought in this battle, whose winning side was led by Don Juan of Austria. For ten points, name this 1571 naval victory for the Holy League over the Ottoman Empire.	ANSWER: Battle of Lepanto
In  this  territory,  Manuel  Rojas  led  the  Grito  de  Lares  uprising  against  Spanish  rule.  In  1950, Blanca  Canales  burned  a  post  office  in  Jayuya  during  an  anti-American  uprising.  Oscar  Collazo  and Griselio  Torresola  attempted  to  kill  President  Truman  in  an  effort  to  raise  awareness  of  this  territory’s independence  movement.  For  ten  points,  name  this  American  commonwealth  where,  in  2012,  only  5% of citizens voted for becoming an independent country with capital San Juan, instead suggesting that it become the 51st state.	ANSWER: PuertoRico
A building in this city designed by Pierre Cardin has been derided for looking like an “illuminated mushroom.” This city is home to the Palace of Light and the Palazzo Dario, which was painted by Claude Monet.  To  protect  trade  secrets,  this  city  forbade  glassmakers  on  its  island  of  Murano  from  leaving. Canaletto depicted this city in his paintingReturn of Bucentaure, Ascension Dayand his many depictions of  itsCanalasso.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Italian  city  built  precariously  on  the  Mediterranean,  where gondolas navigate its many canals.	ANSWER: Venice Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 6
Similarities of this speech to Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address have been noted by scholars, as both praise "the uniqueness of the State’s commitment to democracy.” The speaker of this address proclaims, “Thus choosing to die resisting, rather than to live submitting, they fled only from dishonor” when referring to a certain group of people. This speech  was  recorded  by  Thucydides  in  his  book History of the Peloponnesian War.  For  ten points,  what  "Oration"  was  spoken  by  an  Athenian  politician  to  honor  the  soldiers  who perished fighting the Spartans?	ANSWER: Pericles’s Funeral Oration (accept equivalents)
A  leader  with  this  surname  was  deposed  in  Operation  Fair  Play,  a  coup  led  by Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq. Following a separatist movement led by Sheikh Mujib, a leader with this  surname  founded  the  PPP,  or  People's  Party.  A  prime  minister  with  this  surname  was killed  in  a  car  bombing  in  Rawalpindi  in  2007.  With  Indira  Gandhi,  a  prime  minister  with this  surname  signed  the  Shimla  Agreement,  which  established  the Line  of  Control  in Kashmir. For ten points, identify this surname shared by Pakistani prime ministers Benazir and Zulfikar Ali.	ANSWER: Bhutto (accept Benazir Bhutto; or Zulfikar Ali Bhutto)
This attorney charged that Reuben Crandall's publications instigated slaves to rebel in the leadup to the Snow Riot. Earlier, this man prosecuted Richard Lawrence, who tried to use two malfunctioning firearms to kill Andrew Jackson. This man was detained aboard the HMS Tonnant to  negotiate  the  release  of  William  Beanes,  during  which  time  he  wrote  a poem  that  mentions  "the  shore  dimly  seen  through  the  mists  of  the  deep."  For  ten  points, name  this  lawyer,  who  wrote  a  poem  about  the  shelling  of  Fort  McHenry  which  later became "The Star-Spangled Banner."	ANSWER: Francis Scott Key
In  1665,  public  celebrations  of  this  observance  were  banned  under  the  Mughal emperor Aurangzeb. Guru Gobind Singh extended this observance for Sikhs, adding a three- day-long festival which traditionally includes martial arts demonstrations. In 2016, Pakistan controversially  gave  localities  the  power  to  declare  this  festival  a  public  holiday.  For  ten points, name this Hindu “Festival of Love" that celebrates the arrival of spring and which is often celebrated by people throwing brightly colored powders.	ANSWER: Holi (accept Holika Dahan; or Rangwali Holi; or Dol Purnima; or Dhuleti; or Dhulandi; or Ukuli; or Manjal Kuli; or Yaosang; or Shigmo; or Phagwah; or Jajiri; prompt on "Festival of Spring", "Festival of Love", or "Festival of Colors" before "For ten points")  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 8
This  politician  was  depicted  as  the  "after"  photo  in  a  cover  by  the Private Eye with the  headline,  “World’s  First  Face  Transplant  A  Success.’”  This  politician  was  heavily criticized  after  labeling  another  party  as  “fruitcakes,  loonies,  and  closet  racists.”  The decision for the United Kingdom to opt out of the European Union led to this politician’s resignation in 2016. For ten points, what Conservative politician preceded Theresa May as prime minister of the United Kingdom?	ANSWER: David Cameron (or David William Donald Cameron)
Despite  originally  being  this  man's  campaign  manager,  James  Garfield  jumped  him and  James  G.  Blaine  as  the  Republican  presidential  candidate  in  1880.  Accusations  of bribery  led  to  the  belief  that  this  man  committed  the  "Crime  of  '73."  Due  to  the  ineffective Valentine Act in his home state, this man supported a namesake act that involved a certain "restraint  of  trade."  Henry  Clayton  amended  that  act  named  for  this  Ohio  senator,  which permits "innocent monopolies." For ten points, identify this namesake of an 1890 Antitrust Act.	ANSWER: John Sherman (accept Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890)
The  writing  on  the  Pashupati  seal  found  at  this  site  has  yet  to  be  deciphered.  This site's  initial  excavation  was  led by  Ernest  Mackay,  who  discovered  artworks  including  the soapstone  "Priest-King''  statue  and  the  bronze  "Dancing  Girl"  statuette.  This  site's  Great Granary  and  Great  Bath  date  from  the  Third  millennium  BCE,  and  this  site's  name  means "mound of the dead men'' in Sindhi. For ten points, name this archeological site in present- day Pakistan, a major center of the Indus Valley Civilization.	ANSWER: Mohenjo-daro (prompt on "Indus Valley" or "Indus Valley Civilization" before mentioned; prompt on "Sindh" before "Sindhi"; prompt on "Pakistan" before mentioned)
Signs protesting this event encouraged residents to “buy no milk.” An editorial by the New  York  Times dubbed this event the “Nightmare in the Catskills.” Governor Nelson Rockefeller,  who  declared  this  event a “disaster zone,” considered sending in the National Guard but was dissuaded by this event’s organizer, John P. Roberts. Carlos Santana, the Killers, and Miley Cyrus were scheduled to perform in a failed revival of this event. For ten points, what landmark 1960s musical festival was held in Bethel, New York?	ANSWER: Woodstock (or Woodstock Music and Art Fair; or Woodstock Rock Festival)
This  man,  who  founded  and  led  the  National  Union  of  Mineworkers  in  the  1980s, was implicated in the violent Marikana massacre against striking miners. This Soweto-born politician lost a 1997 presidential election to fellow party member Thabo Mbeki [[mm-BEH- kee]]. In July 2021, this politician deployed the National Guard to the states of Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal after the arrest of his predecessor, Jacob Zuma, caused riots and looting. For ten points, name this ANC politician and president of South Africa.	ANSWER: Cyril Ramaphosa (or Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 8
This  state's  Nutty  Putty  Cave  was  permanently filled  in  with  concrete  after  John Jones  became  fatally  stuck  upside  down  in  a  narrow  passageway  in  2009.  19th  century French fur trapper Étienne Provost inspired the name of a city in this state after he followed the Green River to discover this state's largest body of water. One National Park in this state was first homesteaded by Ebenezer Bryce. For ten points, name this western state where in 1928,  Bryce  Canyon  National  Park  was  established,  one  year  before  Arches  National  Park came into being.	ANSWER: Utah   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 8
This battle was referred to by the Benedictine chronicler Orderic Vitalis as "Senlac," though  it  may  have  taken  place  near  Caldbec  and  Telham  Hill.  Amatus  of  Montecassino described how one ruler was killed by an arrow to the eye at this battle, the site of which is marked  by  Battle  Abbey.  Weeks  before  this  battle,  the  losers  were  forced  to  engage  a Norwegian  attack  at  Fulford  and  Stamford  Bridge.  Harold  Godwinson  was killed in,  for  ten points, what 1066 victory for William the Conqueror?	ANSWER: Battle of Hastings
This city's  royal  namesake  was  depicted  by Charles  Henry  Niehaus  [[NEE-haus]] in an equestrian statue known as the Apotheosis of [this city]. This city hosted a 1904 World's Fair,  during  which  Brookings  Hall  was  constructed  for  this  city's  Washington  University. Native  brewer  Ellis  Wainwright  names  a  red  skyscraper  in  this  city  designed  by  Louis Sullivan. This city is commemorated as the origin of the Lewis and Clark Expedition with the Gateway Arch. For ten points, name this Missouri city located along the Mississippi River.	ANSWER: St. Louis
U.S.  officials  opened  a  warrant  for  this  man's  arrest  after  he  traveled  to  Yugoslavia for  a  competition  in  1992.  At  age  thirteen,  this  man  beat  Donald  Byrne  in  the  so-called "Game  of  the  Century."  This  man  became  World  Champion  in  1972  by  defeating  Boris Spassky  in  Reykjavík  and  later  became  a citizen of  Iceland.  This man  refused  to  defend  his title  against  Anatoly  Karpov  in  1975  over  a  rules  disagreement.  For  ten  points,  name  this reclusive American chess Grandmaster.	ANSWER: Robert "Bobby" Fischer
The subject of this event walked a route known as the Via Dolorosa, before meeting his  end.  During  this  event,  a  man  named  Dismas  told  its  main  subject  to  "remember  me when  you  come  into  your  kingdom."  After  this  event,  a  soldier  named  Longinus  [[lon-JAI- nus]] pierced the side of this event's central subject, causing water and blood to gush from the  wound.  For  ten  points,  name  this  event  ordered  by  Pontius  Pilate,  in  which  the Son  of God was hung on a cross outside of Jerusalem.	ANSWER: Crucifixion of Jesus Christ (accept descriptive answers of the death or killing of Jesus Christ)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 7
In   the   leadup   to   this   event,   Alexander   Manly   refuted   Rebecca   Felton's   op-ed advocating for lynching "a thousand times a week." During this event, a mob protested the election  of  a  mayor  representing  the  Fusionists.  Alfred  Waddell  threatened  to  "choke  the Cape Fear River with carcasses" during this event, which included the torching of the Black- owned Daily Record office.  William  McKinley  refused  to  provide  federal  assistance  to  stop, for ten points, what 1898 white supremacist incident in North Carolina?	ANSWER: Wilmington Insurrection of 1898 (accept Wilmington race riot, Wilmington massacre, or Wilmington Coup)
Russia  imposed  sanctions  on  this  man  and  Christopher  Wray  in  April  2021.  From 2013  to  2020,  this  man  served  as  chief  judge  of  the  D.C.  circuit.  This  man  prosecuted  the perpetrators  of  the  Oklahoma  City  bombing  and  rose  to  fame  when  a  Republican  Senate majority refused to consider his nomination for the Supreme Court. In his highest position, this man vowed to bring to justice those who stormed the U.S. Capitol on January 6th, 2021. For ten points, name this jurist who became U.S. Attorney General in March 2021.	ANSWER: Merrick Garland
The Spanish Arch in Galway was partly destroyed by one of these events. Ammianus Marcellinus recorded one of these events which destroyed Alexandria in a "day of horror." "Meteo" types of these events often hit Britain, and a confirmed example of these events in Scotland was caused by the Storegga slide. 230 thousand people died in a 2004 Boxing Day event  of  this  type  in  the  Indian  Ocean.  Thucydides  correctly  postulated  that  oceanic earthquakes caused, for ten points, what deadly tidal waves?	ANSWER: Tsunamis (accept Meteotsunamis; accept Tidal Waves before mentioned; prompt on "earthquake(s)")
A secret society that formed in this city originated from the Luojiao [[LWOH-JEOW]] Buddhist  sect  and  was  known  as  the  Green  Gang.  A  photograph  titled Bloody  Saturday depicts  a  crying  baby  among  the  ruins  of  one  of  this  city's  train  stations.  In  a  battle  in  this city, Lieutenant Oyama was killed at its Hongqiao [[HUNG-CHOW]] Airport. A 1937 battle in this  city  was referred to as “Stalingrad on the Yangtze.” For ten points, name this Chinese city occupied by Japan through much of World War Two.	ANSWER: Shanghai  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 7
This   conflict   included   a   campaign   to   capture   the   town   of   Samosata.   Robert Curthouse  arrived  to  this  conflict  after  Kilij  Arslan  was  defeated  at  Nicaea.  Bohemond  of Taranto won at this campaign's Battle of Dorylaeum. Near the end of this conflict, Godfrey of Bouillon [[bwee-YOHN]] successfully fended off a Fatimid attack at Ascalon. This campaign was called for at the Council of Clermont by Pope Urban II with a cry of "Deus Vult!" For ten points, name this 11th century campaign in which Christians recaptured the Holy Land.	ANSWER: First Crusade (accept Princes’ Crusade; prompt on "Crusade" or "People's Crusade")
In 1855, this politician imported 33 camels and hired eight expert camel herders in order to create the experimental U.S. Camel Corps. During the Mexican-American War, while still  a  sitting  U.S.  Senator,  this  politician  armed  and  outfitted  the  Mississippi  Rifles.  As Secretary  of  War  under  Franklin  Pierce,  this  man  promoted  the  Gadsden  Purchase  of southern  Arizona  from  Mexico.  Later,  this  man  governed  another  country  from  Richmond. For ten points, name this politician who served as president of the Confederacy.	ANSWER: Jefferson Davis   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 7
A minister with this surname withdrew his support for the Salem witch trials after his wife, Sarah, was  accused.  Another  man  with  this  surname  wrote  about  the  effects  of  treason  accusations  on  Philip Nolan  in  A  Man  Without  a  Country.  Another  man  with  this  surname  was  captured  at  Flushing  Bay following the Battle of Long Island. That man said “I only regret that I have but one life to lose for my country.” For ten points, give this surname of the Revolutionary War spy, Nathan.	ANSWER:Hale
This man flayed his daughter’s lovers after accusations of adultery in the Nesle’s Tower affair. This man’s claims to supremacy were repudiated in the Unam sanctam, prompting him to send Guillaume de Nogaret to arrest Boniface VIII. This king burned Jacques de Molay at the stake in an attempt to curb the power of the Knights Templar. Clement V was elected pope during this man’s reign, beginning the Avignon papacy. For ten points, name this French king named for his handsomeness.	ANSWER:Philip IV(acceptPhilip the Fair)
Charles Moose resigned as a leading investigator into this event after his police department banned him from making a book deal about it titled Three Weeks in October. A stolen Bushmaster XM-15 was used in these attacks, which resulted in a death sentence for John Allen Muhammad. Lee Boyd Malvo was a juvenile perpetrator of this event, whose first victim was shot in Rockville, Maryland. For ten points, name these 2002 attacks that affected the metropolitan area of the U.S. capital.	ANSWER: WashingtonD.C.  sniperattacks (acceptBeltway  sniper, acceptDistrict  of  Columbia sniperattacks)
This person defended assassin Leon Czolgosz [CHOW-gaw] as a “supersensitive being.” The last twelve chapters  of  a  work  by  this  author  about  the  Kronstadt  Rebellion  were  removed  entirely  by  Doubleday, Page & Co., resulting in her book My Further Disillusionment in Russia. In response to World War One, this editor of the journal Mother Earth co-founded the No Conscription League with Alexander Berkman who tried to assassinate Henry Clay Frick. For ten points, name this Lithuanian-born anarchist.	ANSWER: EmmaGoldman
KKK activities in this state were the target of the FBI’s COINTELPRO-WHITE HATE program. In this state, three CORE workers were found dead under a dam. In 1964, delegates from this state to the Democratic National Convention created this state’s namesake Freedom Democratic Party. A riot broke out  in  Oxford  after  James  Meredith  attempted  to  enroll  at  this  state’s  namesake  university.  Freedom Summer occurred in, for ten points, what state that was described as “burning” during the Civil Rights Movement?	ANSWER:Mississippi Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
This empire was splintered into the Joma and Hamana spheres shortly after its final ruler, Mahmud IV,  was  defeated  at  the  Battle  of  Djenne.  Another  ruler  of  this  empire  allegedly  founded  it  after  using a  rooster-tipped  arrow  at  the  battle  of  Kirina  to  defeat  Sumanguru.  Sundiata  Keita  ruled  this  empire, another ruler of which allegedly inflated the price of gold along the Mediterranean after his lavish spending while on the hajj. Mansa Musa was a ruler of, for ten points, what West African empire?	ANSWER:MaliEmpire (acceptMandenKurufaba, acceptNyeni))
While  serving  as  a  self  described,  “oppressed  assistant  professor,”  this  man  wrote  an  essay  about calculating  interest  rates  for  goods  traveling  at  light  speeds.  This  economist  argued  that  there  were parallels in economic policy between 2008 and 1929 in The Return of Depression Economics. This winner of the 2008 Nobel Prize in Economics described U.S. foreign policies in The Great Unravelling. For ten points, name this economist and columnist for the New York Times.	ANSWER: PaulKrugman
A  three-day  retreat  to  this  location,  known  as  the  Alberich  Maneuver,  was  cited  in  propaganda as  “Hun  barbarism.”  A  decision  to  create  this  position  “was  not  reached  without  a  painful  struggle,” according to Erich Ludendorff, who started building it after the Battle of the Somme. The Siegfried Line was one section of, for ten points, what system of artillery, blockhouses, and trenches built during World War One, named for a Field Marshal who later became the German president?	ANSWER:Hindenburg  Line(accept  “Position”  in  place  of  “Line,”  acceptSiegfriedstellungor Siegfried Line/Position before mentioned)
Alberta’s Newbrook Observatory was the first to photograph this object whose sighting was an initial goal of Operation Moonwatch. Sergei Korolev proposed the original plan for developing this object, and its  prototype,  “Object  D,”  was  deemed  too  complicated  to  meet  the  early-1957  deadline.  This  object’s three  week  mission  was  a  major  blow  to  the  U.S.  in  the  Space  Race.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Soviet artificial satellite, the first ever launched into space.	ANSWER:Sputnik1
Larry McDonald attempted to impeach an African-American holder of this position. The first woman to hold this position defended anti-communist dictatorships in her namesake doctrine. One holder of this position was ready to wait for an answer to a question he posed to Valerian Zorin “until Hell freezes over.” A woman who was initially hesitant to label the Hutu-Tutsi conflict as a genocide held this post. For ten points, name this position held by Andrew Young and Madeleine Albright.	ANSWER:UnitedStatesAmbassadorto theUnitedNations Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 7
This  man  was  forced  to  recognize  Alexander  III  as  pope  after  signing  the  Peace  of  Venice.  In  one battle,  the  “Company  of  Death”  successfully  defended  Aribert’scarrocciofrom  this  man.  This  man’s attempt to control the papacy was thwarted at Legnano by the Lombard League. In another campaign, this  man  drowned  in  the  Saleph  River  before  he  could  join  the  forces  of  Philip  Augustus  and  Richard I.  Named  for  his  red  beard,  for  ten  points,  identify  this  Holy  Roman  Emperor  who  died  on  the  Third Crusade.	ANSWER: FrederickI(acceptFrederickBarbarossa)
One character in this work becomes pregnant after a head in a calabash tree spits in her hand. This work begins with a creation story where wooden people are killed in a flood. In this work, one character has his head stolen by Camazotz when he’s decapitated in the House of the Bats, which he visits after the House of Dark and the House of Cold. The Hero Twins become the sun and moon after defeating the lords of Xibalba by winning the ball game in, for ten points, what Mayan collection of myths?	ANSWER: The PopolVuh
The  earlier  iterations  of  this  publication  offered  advice  from  “Father  Abraham”,  many  of  whose sayings were collected inThe Way to Wealth. This publication predicted the death of Titan Leeds and, when Leeds did not die on the predicted date, claimed that he had been replaced by an impostor. The creator of this publication was inspired byRider’s British Merlinto the degree that he stole its authors name, Richard Saunders, as his pseudonym. For ten points, name this publication by Benjamin Franklin which offered witty sayings as well as seasonal weather information.	ANSWER: PoorRichard’s Almanac
The  SB  attempted  to  humiliate  this  man  in  the  “Trianglo”  action.  Juan  Maria  Fernandez  Krohn attempted to stab this man with a bayonet during his visit to Fatima. Another assassination attempt on this  man  was  carried  out  by  Grey  Wolf  member  Mehmet  Ali  Agca.  This  man  promulgated  the  Pastor bonus and the Catechism of the Catholic Church. A 1979 visit by this man to Warsaw helped inspire the creation of Solidarity. For ten points, name this predecessor of Benedict XVI, a Polish-born Pope.	ANSWER: JohnPaulII(Accept Karol JozefWojtyla)
One leader of this country declared that “the revolution has no winners and no losers” and used the policy  of  Chehabism.  Bashir  Gemayel  led  the  left  wing  Kataeb  Phalange  Party  in  this  country,  where a  1958  crisis  prompted  Dwight  Eisenhower  to  authorize  a  U.S.  intervention  for  Camille  Chamoun  in Operation Blue Bat. This country’s 1943 National Pact shares power between Sunni and Shia Muslims, Greek Orthodox and Maronite Christians, and Druze in, for ten points, what country centered at Beirut?	ANSWER: Lebanon Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
Canadian  aboriginal  William  Arnold  Combes  accused  this  person  of  kidnapping  ten  indigenous children.  In  2017,  the  Paradise  Papers  revealed  that  this  person’s  Duchy  of  Lancaster  held  offshore accounts to avoid paying taxes. This woman was criticized for not flying a flag at half-mast after the death of her daughter-in-law Princess Diana. For ten points, name this queen who succeeded her father George VI as the monarch of the United Kingdom.	ANSWER: ElizabethII
James  Knight  captured  Fort  Albany  for  this  company  while  in  1686,  Pierre  le  Moyne  d’Iberville captured  this  company’s  post  of  Moose  Factory.  As  Chief  Factor  in  this  company’s  Columbia  District, John McLoughlin became known as “father of Oregon”. Indigo stripes called points were put on blankets that  this  company  exchanged.  The  North  West  company  encroached  on  this  corporation,  which  was granted Prince Rupert’s Land. Often employing First Nation trappers, for ten points, name this company named for a bay in Canada.	ANSWER: Hudson’sBayCompany (prompt ontheBay)
A general of this dynasty wrote the lyrical poem Man Jiang Hong. That general serving this dynasty had four words tattooed onto his back and was named Yue Fei. This dynasty was the first to establish a permanent navy, although its last emperor drowned at the Battle of Yamen. The Jingkang Incident began the Southern period of this dynasty, which lost its capital Kaifeng to the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty. For ten points, name this dynasty conquered by the Mongol Yuan dynasty.	ANSWER: SongDynasty (AcceptNorthernSonguntil “Southern Period”)
A chord made up of the notes F, B, D-sharp, and G-sharp is named for an operatic character of this composer.  Ludwig  II’s  design  of  Neuschwanstein  Castle  contains  many  references  to  the  works  of  this composer. This composer, who wrote the controversial essay “Jewishness in Music,” wrote an opera with excerpted numbers such as “Elsa’s Procession to the Cathedral” and the “Bridal Chorus.” The Bayreuth Festival honors the operas of, for ten points, what composer of theRing Cycle?	ANSWER: Richard Wagner
In the aftermath of this event, Edward Teller wrote that Jane Fonda suffering a heart attack was the only victim of it. John Kemeny led an investigation in this event which found that a similar occurrence at the David-Besse facility should have provided enough warning. A faulty valve created by Babcock and Wilcox was the cause of this event. During this event, a voluntary evacuation near Harrisburg was carried out after the failure of reactor 2. For ten points, name this partial nuclear meltdown that occurred on a Pennsylvania island.	ANSWER: ThreeMileIslandaccident Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 7
In  preparation  for  this  event,  the  Octagon  House  was  converted  into  a  French  consulate  for  its protection; it was later converted into federal housing. This event, a response to the destruction of private homes during the Raid on Port Dover, was preceded by the Battle of Bladensburg and ended in part by a fluke tornado. This event caused an evacuation of a copy of the Lansdowne Portrait, which was legendarily saved by Dolley Madison. For ten points, name this 1814 event in which British forces torched the capital of the United States.	ANSWER: burning ofWashingtonD.C. (accept equivalents; prompt on partial answers, like “fire” and “attack on Washington”)
Five deities were born from this goddess’s necklace of 500 jewels. To lure this deity out of hiding, a dawn goddess performed a strip tease on top of an overturned tub. This goddess’s brother threw a flayed horse into a room containing her weavers, causing her to retreat into a cave in anger. This goddess, who was born when her father Izanagi washed his left eye, is worshiped at the Ise [ee-say] Shrine. The Emperor of Japan descended from, for ten points, what sun goddess of Shinto myth?	ANSWER: Amaterasu
Radio host Alan Berg was murdered by a group advocating this belief known as the Order. Executions occur during the “Day of the Rope” in a book that furthers this belief, written by William Luther Pierce; that  book  isThe Turner Diaries,  pages  of  which  were  found  in  the  car  of  Timothy  McVeigh  upon  his arrest. The websiteStormfrontwas founded by a former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan to promote, for ten points, what racial ideology promoted by groups like Aryan Nations?	ANSWER: whitesupremacism(acceptwhitenationalism; accept word forms; prompt on racism)
The largest civilian effort of this type used an area codenamed “Annabelle” in the city of Uli, but hostile forces using the call sign “Genocide” attempted to thwart that church-supported effort during the Biafran  War.  Another  event  of  this  type  was  coordinated  by  men  like  Curtis  LeMay  and  Lucius  Clay and codenamed Operation Vittles by the Americans; that 1948 to 1949 effort saw over 8,000 tons of food and supplies provided each day. For ten points, name this type of supply effort carried out over a Soviet blockade in Cold War Berlin.	ANSWER: airlifts  (acceptBerlinAirlift;  acceptBiafranAirlift;  prompt  on  relief  efforts,  supply efforts, etc.)
A former leader of this party was defeated in a 2017 election by Colin Clark. The 79 Group was a left  wing  faction  of  this  party,  whose  supporters  are  divided  into  gradualist  and  fundamentalist  wings. Winnie Ewing won the Hamilton riding in a 1967 by-election, this party’s second-ever seat in Parliament. Nicola Sturgeon became the leader of this party after Alex Salmond resigned due to the failure of a 2014 independence referendum. For ten points, name this third largest political party in the British House of Commons, a prominent advocate for the independence of Scotland.	ANSWER: ScottishNationalParty Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
Frederick II legitimized this group’s land holdings in the Golden Bull of Rimini. This organization was summoned by Duke Konrad I to defend his territory against the Old Prussians, who they ended up conquering.  This  group’s  incursion  into  Russia  was  beaten  back  at  the  Battle  on  the  Ice  by  Alexander Nevsky, and another of their military losses came against the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania at the Battle of Grunwald. For ten points, name this Catholic military order.	ANSWER: TeutonicKnights(or theTeutonicOrder; acceptOrderofBrothersoftheGerman HouseofSaintMaryinJerusalem)
A commander from this state lost his right arm at the Battle of Fair Oaks and commanded the XI Corps[“eleventhcore”], who were decisively outflanked at the Battle of Chancellorsville. Union general O.O. Howard hailed from this state, as did the Vice President during much of the Civil War, Hannibal Hamlin.  Joshua  Chamberlain  commanded  this  state’s  20th  Volunteer  Regiment,  which  defended  Little Round  Top  during  the  Battle  of  Gettysburg.  For  ten  points,  name  this  state  where  regiments  were mustered near Portland.	ANSWER: Maine
A poem criticizing British involvement in these conflicts ruined Anna Barbault’s public reputation and career. The lines “The boy stood on the burning deck / Whence all but he had fled” open a Felicia Hemans  poem  inspired  by  one  of  these  conflicts  titled  “Casabianca.”  A  novel  that  fictionalizes  these conflicts includes a chapter set at the Duchess of Richmond’s ball in Brussels, after which George Osborne is killed at Quatre Bras. For ten points, name this set of conflicts that provides the backdrop ofVanity Fair, in which several men survive the Battle of Waterloo.	ANSWER: NapoleonicWars
This  ruler’s  government  was  challenged  by  the  Green  March.  The  Vertical  Syndicate  was  the  only labor union allowed in this ruler’s country. The Valley of the Fallen was commissioned by this man as a symbol of reconciliation. This ruler’s prime minister was killed in Operation Ogre by Basque separatists. The death of Jos ́e Sanjurjo helped propel this man to power. The Carlists and Falange were merged by, for ten points, what longtime dictator of Spain?	ANSWER: Francisco FrancoBahamonde
Excavation  efforts  by  Hormuzd  Rassam  located  the  contents  of  these  buildings  in  the  temple  of Samas  in  Sippar.  Another  of  these  buildings  housed  two  huge  statues  of  Dagon  and  two  rooms  called “houses of the rolls;” that building of this type was allegedly visited by Alexander the Great. A palace in Nineveh was home to one of these buildings built by Ashurbanipal that contained thousands of cuneiform tablets. For ten points, name this type of location where theEpic of Gilgameshand other literary works may have been stored.	ANSWER: (Mesopotamian)library Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 7
Eleanor Billington and Susanna White were two of the four women charged with preparing for this event. James Baker claimed that this event occurred around Michaelmas. A governor ordered four of his men to go on a “fowling” mission three days before this event, which celebrated the provision of supplies by  Massasoit.  William  Bradford  organized  this  event  after  a  successful  corn  harvest  in  1621.  For  ten points, name this event in which the Plymouth Pilgrims held a feast of gratitude.	ANSWER: the First Plymouth Thanksgiving(accept descriptions of thefirstThanksgiving)
This country is of primary interest to the activist group Brothers to the Rescue, which had planes shot down  in  1996.  Edward  Lansdale  directed  Operation  Mongoose  against  this  country,  which  was  also  the focus of the Helms-Burton Act. It sent numerous mental patients to the U.S. during the Mariel boatlift. The CIA trained Brigade 2506, which tried to invade this country in April 1961. For ten points, name this Caribbean island country, the site of the failed, U.S.-backed Bay of Pigs invasion.	ANSWER: Republic of Cuba
The Latin term which became this economic phrase originated from the term for a head of cattle. The rate of return on this quantity being higher than the rate of growth in a country’s economy leads to inequality according to Thomas Piketty’s 2013 work describing “this concept”in the 21st Century. The exploitation of labor by the bourgeoisie was criticized in 1867 in an economic text by this name written by Karl Marx. For ten points, name this economic concept, a factor of production used to produce other goods.	ANSWER: capital(acceptCapitalin the 21st Century; accept DasKapital; acceptcapitalismuntil “quantity” is read in the second sentence)
In  December  2016,  this  leader  announced  his  country’s  official  unit  of  currency  would  become  the Toman. This leader was elected in 2013 with the slogan of a “Government of prudence and hope” after Mahmoud Ahmadinejad served for two terms. This leader negotiated with the P5+1 countries regarding his  country’s  nuclear  program,  with  a  Joint  Comprehensive  Plan  of  Action  agreed  on  in  2015.  For  ten points, name this current President of Iran.	ANSWER: Hassan Rouhani
Description acceptable. “Slick” Goodlin demanded $150,000 to perform this action, so the honor went to the second choice instead; that man fell off his horse and injured his ribs, so Jack Ridley fashioned a broom handle into a lever to help seal the hatch. This event, which took place above Rogers Dry Lake in the Mojave Desert, utilized the Bell XS-1, a rocket-powered airplane. For ten points, name this October 14, 1947 accomplishment performed by Chuck Yeager.	ANSWER:  first breakingofthesoundbarriervia  airplane  (accept  descriptions  of  firstbreaking Mach1in an airplane; accept additional correct information if given; prompt on correct-but-not-sought answers, like “Chuck Yeager’s flight”) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
A media building owned by this leader was rammed by a wheel-loader at the start of the Bulldozer Revolution. A Chinese embassy was accidentally bombed during a NATO intervention against this leader called  Operation  Allied  Force.  This  man  was  accused  of  failing  to  prevent  Ratko  Mladic[m’lah-ditch] from perpetrating the Srebrenica[sreh-breh-neetz-ah] massacre by the prosecutors of his war crime trial, though  he  died  of  a  heart  attack  in  2006  before  a  verdict  could  be  reached.  For  ten  points,  name  this Serbian president of Yugoslavia during the Kosovo War.	ANSWER: Slobodan Milosevi ́c
One  work  in  this  medium  was  paired  with  a  verse  calling  the  depicted  figure  a  “Brobdingnagian Bagman.” Bags of money are rolled up a man’s tongue in an Honor ́e Daumier work in this medium. A man straddles the continent of Africa while holding up a telegraph line in one of these works. The subject of another work in this medium is called the “Brains” for winning the Rochester National Convention and has his head replaced with a sack of money. Boss Tweed was often satirized by Thomas Nast in, for ten points, what type of editorial artwork?	ANSWER: politicalcartoons (prompt on partial answers)
The arrest of an advocate of this cause inspired another advocate to sneak a knife into the National Gallery and slash theRokeby Venus. A proponent of this cause was trampled to death in the Epsom Derby in 1913. The Cat and Mouse Act applied to people who were imprisoned for supporting this cause, whose advocates included Millicent Fawcett and several members of the Pankhurst family. For ten points, name this cause achieved in Great Britain in 1918, which effectively doubled the size of the country’s electorate.	ANSWER: women’ssuffragein the United Kingdom
Along with two friends, the main character of this novel risks punishment by swimming naked across a canal in the middle of the night to rendezvous with three French women. This book’s protagonist feels remorse over a stabbing a man whom he discovers through his papers was a printer named Gerard Duval. In this novel, Kemmerich’s boots are acquired by the main character after the death of Fredrich Muller, and Kat’s death causes Paul Baumer to lose interest in fighting in World War I. For ten points, name this novel by Erich Maria Remarque.	ANSWER: AllQuietontheWesternFront(orImWestennichtsNeues)
During these conflicts, the Thirteen Factories were twice destroyed. James Bremer used gunboats to great effect in this conflict and blockaded the Pearl River. The second of these conflicts began when the Arrowwas seized. Lin Zexu sent a letter asking “where is your conscience?” to Queen Victoria in the first of these conflicts, which ended with the cessation of Hong Kong Island in the unequal Treaty of Nanking. For ten points, name this series of conflicts between Great Britain and China sparked by drug exports.	ANSWER: (First and/or Second)OpiumWar(s) (prompt on descriptions of wars between Great Britain and China before mentioned) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 7
In  this  region,  Vespasian  served  with  the  Legio  II  Augusta  and  participated  in  the  Battle  of  the Medway.  This  province’s  northernmost  reach  came  with  Agricola’s  victory  at  Mons  Graupius  over  the Caledonians.  The  Legio  IX  Hispania  supposedly  disappeared  in  this  province,  where  Gaius  Suetonius Paulus suppressed an uprising of the Iceni tribe after his victory in the Battle of Watling Street. Hadrian’s Wall lies in, for ten points, what Roman province where Boudica sacked Londonimium?	ANSWER: Britannia(accept  descriptions  of  the  island  of  GreatBritain;  do  not  accept  England  or other names)
According to legend, after Claude Harmon performed this feat, Ben Hogan replied “How was your shot?”  On  Sunday,  April  10th,  Shane  Lowry,  Davis  Love  III,  and  Louis  Oosthuizen[oost-hoy-zen]  all accomplished  this  feat,  with  Oosthuizen  requiring  a  bounce  off  of  J.B.  Holmes’  ball.  This  rare  feat has  occurred  27  times  in  competition  at  Augusta  National,  but  is  significantly  more  common  on  the Wednesday of Masters week, during the Par 3 contest. For ten points, name this feat in which a golfer finishes a hole with a minimum amount of work.	ANSWER: making a hole-in-one(or anace) at the Masters
The  first  elected  King  of  the  Polish-Lithuanian  Commonwealth  was  from  this  family,  as  was  the first husband of Mary, Queen of Scots. One ruler from this family hosted the Field of the Cloth of Gold. Catherine de Medici’s husband belonged to this family, which originally took power after the extinction of the Capet Dynasty. This family fought against the Plantagents in the Hundred Years War. For ten points, name this French dynasty which was succeeded by the Bourbons and whose members included Francis I.	ANSWER: House of Valois
In this battle, Lauzun’s Legion was able to repulse a foraging party led by Banastre Tarleton. During this battle, the Gatinois regiment provided carpenters to break down palisades at Redoubt 9. One myth about this battle notes that the general who fired the first cannon shot ended up hitting a dinner table where his enemies were eating. This battle ended with the playing of the tune “The World Turned Upside Down”  while  Charles  O’  Hara  surrendered.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1781  battle  in  which  Cornwallis surrendered to George Washington.	ANSWER: Battle of Yorktown
This man depicted the murder of a working class family during the July Monarchy in his lithograph Rue Transnonain.  One  work  by  this  artist  shows  a  photographer  in  a  hot  air  balloon  taking  pictures. Another  work  by  this  artist  satirically  depicts  an  obese  Louis-Phillipe  being  fed  humans  as  the  title creature.  This  artist  ofNadar Elevating Photography to the Height of ArtandGargantuandepicted  a peasant family in a namesake carriage on a train. For ten points, name this 19th century French artist of Third Class Carriage.	ANSWER: Honore Daumier Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 7
A  procession  celebrating  this  substance  takes  place  in  Bruges[broozh]  on  Ascension  Day.  This substance,  which  is  created  in  the  epiclesis,  is  addressed  in  a  litany  as  the  “refreshment  of  souls”  and “price of our salvation” that is “flowing forth in the Agony.” Weingarten Abbey contains a sample of this substance collected by Longinus. An actin persona Christiinstills this substance in an unchanged species in the act of Transubstantiation. For ten points, name this substance that is represented in the Eucharist by wine.	ANSWER: bloodofChrist(orJesusfor “Christ;” acceptHolyBlood)
Soybean  farmers  used  road  blocks  to  protest  this  leader’s  plans  to  increase  export  taxes.  Protests against  this  leader  erupted  after  the  murder  of  prosecutor  Alberto  Nisman.  This  leader  was  widely criticized  for  tweeting  about  “lice  and  petloleum”  during  a  visit  to  China.  This  leader  succeeded  her husband Nestor, who led the Peronist Justicialist Party. For ten points, name this female former President of Argentina that lost a December 2015 election to Mauricio Macri.	ANSWER: Christina Fernandez de Kirchner
This event was investigated by John Kenlon. Kate Alterman was made to repeat her testimony about this event multiple times by Max Steuer, leading the jury to believe that she had memorized what to say during the trial of Max Blanck and Isaac Harris. The ILGWU grew substantially in the aftermath of this event, during which William Gunn Shephard wrote of seeing women jump out of windows because doors had  been  locked.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1911  event  in  which  a  fire  in  the  Asch  building  killed  146 garment workers.	ANSWER:TriangleShirtwaistFactory fire
In March 2016, researchers found thousands of artifacts from this man’s shipEsmeraldaoff the coast of Oman. The Zamorin believed that this man was not a royal ambassador because his gifts contained no gold or silver. He named Natal while passing through on Christmas Day. TheSao Gabrielwas the flagship of  this  explorer,  who  visited  Mombasa  and  Calicut.  For  ten  points,  name  this  explorer  who,  under  the patronage of Henry the Navigator, became the first European to see India while sailing for Portugal.	ANSWER: Vasco deGama
The implementation of this policy was in question inEvenwel v. Abbott. In his decision inReynolds v. Sims, Chief Justice Warren applied this principle, writing that “legislators represent people, and not acres or trees.” In 2016, the Supreme Court upheld a ruling that convicted felons and children are included in one half of this policy, even though they are ineligible to participate in the other half. The U.S. Senate does notabide by this policy; after each census, districts are re-drawn to allow the House to more accurately abide by it. For ten points, give this four-word phrase for the idea that political power should be equal for all voters.	ANSWER: Oneperson,onevote(acceptmanorwomanfor person; prompt on “redistricting”) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 7
This  island's  Great  Tulip  Tree  in  Inwood  Hill  Park  was  the  site  of  a  celebration commemorating Robert Fulton and a certain 1609 discovery. The Castello Plan, created by Jacques  Cortelyou,  mapped  a  portion  of  this island  while  under  Dutch  settlement.  A  large statue  of  King  George  III  was  pulled  down  on  this  island's  Bowling  Green  park,  and  this island   was   purchased   for   New   Netherland   from   the   Canarsee   by   Peter   Minuit.   New Amsterdam  was  founded  on,  for  ten  points,  what  densely  populated  island  in  New  York City?	ANSWER: Manhattan Island
Two  answers  required:  During  a  battle  between  these  two  countries,  Raimondo Montecuccoli claimed, "Today died a man who did honor to mankind” after that man was killed  by  a  cannonball.  The  Barrier  Treaties  were  signed  by  these  two  countries,  one  of which invaded the other during the Rampjaar [[RAMP-yahr]]. A conflict between these two countries that led to a number of peripheral conflicts was ended with the Peace of Nijmegen [[NYE-may-gen]]  signed  in  one  of  them.  For  ten  points,  name  these  two  countries  which were respectively led by Louis XIV [[the Fourteenth]] and William of Orange.	ANSWER: Kingdom of France and the Netherlands (accept Holland or Nederland in place of the “Netherlands”; accept Royaume de France in place of Kingdom of France)
This man  served  as  governor  of  Cyprus  before  being  elected  tribune  in  62 BC.  This member of the Optimates was notoriously resistant to bribes and accused his rival of being a part  of  the  Catiline  Conspiracy.  One  anecdote  from  that  rivalry  involved  this  man  publicly reading a love letter from his half-sister, Servilia. An opponent of the First Triumvirate, for ten points, who was this Roman senator and rival of Julius Caesar, the great-grandson of an orator known for ending speeches with the line, "Carthage must be destroyed"?	ANSWER: Cato the Younger (or Cato Minor; accept Marcus Porcius Cato Uticensis; prompt on “Cato” or “Marcus Porcius Cato”; do not accept or prompt on "Cato the Elder")
H.F.  van  Emden  and  David  Peakall  wrote  a  1996  follow-up  to  this  work  titled: Beyond [this  book].  This  book  was  inspired  by  a  letter  appearing  in The Boston Herald and credits declining bird populations to thin eggshells that broke prematurely. Al Gore credited this work with starting his interest in environmental issues, and this work was instrumental in the EPA's eventual ban on DDT for agricultural use. For ten points, name this best-selling 1962 environmental science book by Rachel Carson.	ANSWER: Silent Spring  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 9
In  a  Dutch  town,  two  members  of  this  organization  named  Sigismund  Best  and Richard  Stevens  were  captured  during  the  Venlo  Incident  after  a  trap  was  sprung  by Abwehr   [[AHB-vehr]]   head   Walter   Schellenberg.   This   organization   plotted,   but   never executed,  a  plan  to  sneak  estrogen  into  Adolf  Hitler's  food  in  an  effort  to  feminize  him. Author  Graham  Greene  served  in  this  organization  under  Kim  Philby,  who  later  betrayed this organization as a member of the "Cambridge Five" and joined the KGB. For ten points, name this foreign intelligence agency of the United Kingdom.	ANSWER: MI6 (accept Secret Intelligence Service; accept SIS; prompt on "Secret Service Bureau")
This  man  and  his  sibling  used  Frank  Meyer's  principle  of  "fusionism"  when  they developed the "Sharon Statement," which was the guiding thesis of the Young Americans for Freedom.  This  man  threated  to  "sock  a"  debate  opponent  "in  the  mouth"  if  he  kept  calling him a crypto-Nazi during a publicly televised debate. Leftist intellectual Gore Vidal debated, for  ten  points,  what  intellectual  conservative  and  host  of Firing  Line who  founded  the National Review?	ANSWER: William F(rank) Buckley, Jr.
Between 1854 and 1855, three of these events named Tokai, Nankai, and Edo were collectively  known  as  the  Ansei.  The  military  murdered  an  estimated  6,000  Koreans  and socialists  who  they  believed  caused  one  of  these  events.  Goto  Shinpei  led  infrastructure projects following a 1923 example of these events, which mostly did not impact Frank Lloyd Wright's Imperial Hotel. For ten points, name these natural disasters that included the Great Kanto, which destroyed many buildings in Japan.	ANSWER: Earthquakes (accept 1923 Great Kanto earthquake)
The   first   superintendent   of   an   institution   under   this   organization,   Franklin Buchanan,  defected  to  the  Confederacy,  and  an  academy  run  by  this  organization  was established by George Bancroft. This organization's technology during the War of 1812 was analyzed  in  the  first  book  by  Theodore  Roosevelt,  who  was  this  organization's  Assistant Secretary.  Alfred  Thayer  Mahan's  time  as  an  officer  in  this  organization  inspired  his  book The  Influence  of  Sea  Power  upon  History.  For  ten  points,  name  this  organization,  which operates an Academy in Annapolis, Maryland.	ANSWER: United States Navy (accept USN; prompt on "United States Naval Academy")  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 9
An  anachronism  in  a  film  about  this  historical  figure  involved  the  appearance  of  a pair of purple Converse sneakers during a shopping spree. A musical by Michael Kunze and Sylvester  Levay  parallels  the  life  of  this  historical  figure  with  a  woman  named  Margrid Arnaud. A 2006 film directed by Sofia Coppola portrayed this figure’s affair with Axel von Fersen. For ten points, what historical figure was the wife of Louis XVI [[the Sixteenth]] and last queen of France before the French Revolution?	ANSWER: Marie Antoinette (or Marie Antoinette Josèphe Jeanne; or Maria Antonia Josepha Johanna)
Geraldine Brooks's novel March analyses a father who has left to serve in this war as described in another book. Michael Shaara's The Killer Angels takes place during a battle in this  war,  a  deserter  from  which  is  the  subject  of  Charles  Frazier's Cold  Mountain.  John Winder helped oversee a location used during this war in a novel by Mackinlay Kantor titled Andersonville. In a short novel, Henry Fleming overcomes his cowardice by seeking the title injury  during  this  war.  For  ten  points,  name  this  war,  the  setting  of The  Red  Badge  of Courage.	ANSWER: American Civil War (or United States Civil War; or U.S. Civil War)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 9
A  man  who  claimed  allegiance  to  this  colony  despite  living  in  one  to  its  north prompted mob violence that became known as Cresap’s War. The leader of this colony petitioned Queen Anne after another colony was granted land below the 40th parallel. After Richard  Ingle  and  William  Claiborne  took  control  of  this  colony,  Jesuit  priests  were  sent back to England during the "Plundering Time." For ten points, name this colony, whose first Proprietary-Governor was Leonard Calvert.	ANSWER: Maryland
The  Calutron  was  made  as  part  of  this  project  for  use  with  the  Y-12  Project. Personnel  of  this  project  worked  throughout  Europe  in  Operation  Alsos.  For  this  project, Kenneth  Nichols  negotiated  with  the  Eldorado  Gold  Mines  and  the  Union Miniere  [[meen- YEHR]]  du  Haut-Katanga  which  ran  the  Shinkolobwe  [[sheen-koh-LOH-bweh]]  Mine  in Belgian Congo. This project created the Thin Man gun-type design. Leslie Groves and Robert Oppenheimer  directed  this  project,  which  had  sites  in  Oak  Ridge  and  Los  Alamos.  For  ten points, name this project which produced the first atomic bomb.	ANSWER: Manhattan Project (accept Development of Substitute Materials)
While  mayor,  this  politician  implemented  the  Care  Not  Cash  initiative  to  expand housing options. This politician led the Parking and Traffic Commission under Willie Brown. This  man  came  under  fire  for  hosting  a  birthday  party  at  the  French  Laundry  restaurant amid  COVID-19.  This  man  oversaw  the  cessation  of  executions  at  San  Quentin  Prison  and appointed the first inspector general of his state’s BART transit system. For ten points, name this man who was elected governor of California in 2018.	ANSWER: Gavin Newsom
Under  this  king,  Peter  de  la  Mare  was  chosen  as  speaker.  Both  the  Good  and  Bad Parliaments  operated  under  this  king,  whom  William  of  Wykeham  [[WIK-um]]  helped develop  Windsor  Castle.  The  "Lady  of  the  Sun,"  Alice  Perrers  [[peh-REHR]],  had  an  affair with  this  ruler.  This  ruler  rose  to  power  after  removing  Roger  Mortimer  and  formed  the Order  of  the  Garter  in  1348.  This  king,  whose  son  was  the  Black  Prince,  won  at  Crécy  and Poitiers  [[pwah-TYEH]]  against  France.  For  ten  points,  name  this  English  king  who  began the Hundred Years' War.	ANSWER: Edward III (accept Edward of Windsor before mentioned)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 8
Description acceptable. Frank “Big Black” Smith was tortured during one of these events, which was led in part by Weather Underground member Sam Melville. That example of  these  events  was  sparked  by  the  killing  of  George  Jackson.  Participants  in  one  of  these events  took  control  of  the  "D  Yard,"  which  led  Nelson  Rockefeller  to  call  in  the  National Guard. For ten points, name this type of event which occurred in September 1971 at Attica Correctional Facility, involving an uprising of over 2,200 inmates.	ANSWER: Prison Riot (accept synonyms for Prison such as Penitentiary or Jail; accept synonyms for riot such as uprising)
While  working  for  this  institution,  Frank  Hartman  invented  the  liquid  oxygen  tent. This place was the first of its kind to implement the closed staff system. A painting set in this place  contains  a  snail  as  well  as  a  red  ribbon  representing  an  umbilical  cord  and  was created  by  Frida  Kahlo  following  a  miscarriage.  A  home  near  this  location  named  for  its founder's  wife,  Clara,  housed  nursing  students.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Detroit  medical institution named for an automobile business magnate.	ANSWER: Henry Ford Hospital (accept HFH)
Since its rediscovery in 1849, the exploits of the eponymous hero of this poem and his  hairy  friend,  Enkidu, across ancient  Iraq have been  referenced in  many  forms  of  media from Philip Roth’s The Great American Novel to the video game Civilization. The hero of this poem visits Utnapishtim, who recounts a story of how he survived a global flood by building a  giant  boat  from  reeds.  Found  in  Nineveh  by  Austen  Henry  Layard,  this  poem  was originally  written  on  twelve  cuneiform  tablets.  For  ten  points,  what  is  the  name  of  this Sumerian epic poem?	ANSWER: The Epic of Gilgamesh
In  this  country,  a  march  on  Sonsonate  [[sohn-soh-NAH-teh]]  was  organized  by Feliciano Ama. A neighbor targeted this country’s Ilopango airbase during a war named for its hundred hour length. An activist in this country named Farabundo Martí lends his name to  its  FMLN  party.  In  this  country,  Roberto  D'Aubuisson  [[doh-bwee-SOHN]],  who  founded the  ARENA  party, may  have  ordered  the  killing of Bishop  Óscar  Romero. The  Football War was  fought  between  this  country  and  its  northeastern  neighbor,  Honduras.  For  ten  points, name this Central American country which fought a thirteen-year Civil War.	ANSWER: Republic of El Salvador (accept República de El Salvador)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 8
A   line   of   defense   named   for   this   man   stretched   from   the   Baltic   Sea   to   the Carpathians.  Maxim  Litvinov  was  replaced  by  this  man,  who  was  ordered  to  purge  a ministry  of  Jews.  Georgy  Malenkov  and  this  man  teamed  up  against  Nikita  Khrushchev  in the  failed  Anti-Party  Group  takeover.  This  man  secretly  planned  to  partition  Poland  in  a pact he signed with Joachim von Ribbentrop. The foreign minister for Joseph Stalin, for ten points,  who  was  this  man  who  names  a  type  of  improvised  explosive  known  as  his "cocktail"?	ANSWER: Vyacheslav Molotov
While  working  for  this  publication,  Janet  Cooke  won  a  Pulitzer  Prize  for  her  story about  an  eight-year-old  heroin  addict  named  Jimmy,  though  it  was  later  revealed  that  the story  was  largely  a  fabrication.  Under  the  editorship  of  Ben  Bradlee,  this  publication published  a  series  of  documents  detailing  U.S.  involvement  in  Southeast  Asia.  Jeff  Bezos purchased  this  newspaper  in  2013  for  $250  million.  For  ten  points,  name  this  newspaper which published the Pentagon Papers after the New York Times was barred from doing so.	ANSWER: The Washington Post (accept WaPo; prompt on “The Post”)   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Round 8
In this letter, the writer claims that, “It is essential that public opinion should be enlightened” in a section on the education of the masses. The writer of this letter claims that the “alternate domination of one faction over another is itself a frightful despotism.” In this letter, the writer states that, “The shade of retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome.” Written and published in September, 1796, for ten points, name this final presidential statement written by the owner of Mount Vernon.	ANSWER: GeorgeWashington’sFarewell Address
This organization lost nearly 10,000 men at an engagement at Raate Road where it was defeated by Hjalmar Siilasvuo. While head of this organization, Mikhail Frunze defeated Baron Wrangel during a civil war. Georgy Zhukov once commanded this organization whose flag shows an unfilled yellow star against the backdrop of its namesake color. For ten points, name this armed force that was created after the 1917 Russian Revolution and that opposed the White Army.	ANSWER: Workers’ and Peasants’Red Army(prompt on descriptions of the Soviet/Russian army)
Keith  Quincy  controversially  claimed  that  this  ethnic  group  had  an  independent  kingdom  from 400-900  AD.  The  Spirit  Catches  You  and  You  Fall  Down  by  Anne  Fadiman  tells  of  the  struggles  of an  immigrant  family  from  this  ethnic  group  living  in  Merced,  California,  a  community  with  some  5000 of  these  people.  A  subgroup  of  the  Miao,  the  CIA  recruited  thousands  of  these  people  to  fight  in  the Indochina  Wars.  For  ten  points,  name  this  often  persecuted  ethnic  minority  from  China  and  southeast Asia.	ANSWER:Hmong(acceptHmoob)
This man was shot during a 1977 siege during which Hanafi Muslims took 149 hostages at the District Building. This man served as the first chairman of SNCC [SNICK] and protested the 1972 blaxploitation film  Super  Fly  by  forming  a  group  called  BANG.  This  man  succeeded  Walter  Washington  in  his  most prominent position and won a fourth term in that mayoral role in spite of having been caught on videotape smoking crack in 1990. For ten points, name this longtime mayor of Washington, D.C.	ANSWER: MarionBarry
British  officers  in  India  created  a  variant  of  this  sport  in  the  nineteenth  century  using  books  and bottle corks. Jaques [JAKES] of London popularized a common name for this sport whose notable players include Jan-Ove Waldner and Zhang Yining. The penhold grip is often used by players from East Asia who play this sport, considered an Olympic “racket” sport since its introduction in 1988 even though it is played with a paddle. For ten points, name this sport sometimes called “ping pong.”	ANSWER:Table tennis(acceptping ponguntil mentioned) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 8
This  man  won  the  Battle  of  Zapote  Bridge,  but  his  brother  was  killed  during  the  subsequent Battle of Perez Dasmarinas. This man was brought aboard the USS Vicksburg after being captured by the  Macabebe  Scouts  of  Frederick  Funston  in  Palanan.  This  leader  lost  a  1935  presidential  election  to Manuel Quezon. For ten points, name this revolutionary leader who issued the Philippine Declaration of Independence and was the first President of the Philippines.	ANSWER: EmilioAguinaldo
This state saw more than 200 battles in the American Revolutionary War, beginning with the first Battle  of  Ninety  Six.  The  largest  surrender  of  American  soldiers  in  the  Revolutionary  War  took  place in this state after a defeat for Benjamin Lincoln, whereas another setback in this state featured Horatio Gates’s loss at Camden. The fortunes of the colonists in this state fared better near the Broad River. For ten points, name this state where Daniel Morgan was victorious at Cowpens.	ANSWER:South Carolina
While sailing for this group, Paul Beneke was put on trial for seizing a triptych from England. This group  held  drittel  meetings  in  preparation  for  a  central  “meeting  ride,”  or  Tagfahrt.  This  group  was harassed by the Likedeelers after pushing the Victual Brothers out of Gotland. This group imposed a tax on Haakon VI and his father-in-law in the Treaty of Stralsund. Centered at Lubeck, for ten points, name this German confederation of merchant guilds.	ANSWER:Hanseatic League(acceptHansa)
An economic advisor to this man named Fuad Shubaki alleged that this man allocated aid money for  buying  weaponry.  The  Madrid  Conference  of  1991  attempted  to  broker  a  peace  between  this  man’s organization and a national government. A Mukataa in Ramallah served as the central compound of this leader after he signed a 1995 agreement with Yitzhak Rabin known as the Oslo Accord. For ten points, name this longtime chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.	ANSWER: YasserArafat(acceptAbu Ammar)
This  man  told  a  graduating  class  to  “be  ashamed  to  die  until  you  have  won  some  victory  for humanity” while president of Antioch College. This man succeeded to John Quincy Adams’s House seat and  criticized  Daniel  Webster  for  his  support  of  the  Compromise  of  1850.  After  a  trip  to  Prussia,  this man founded The Common School Journal reflecting one of his main principles that the “public should no longer remain ignorant.” For ten points, name this Massachusetts education reformer.	ANSWER: HoraceMann Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 8
This  system  was  allegedly  exploited  when  Justinian  successfully  sent  spies  disguised  as  Christian monks  to  steal  eggs.  Thanks  to  the  missions  of  Zhang  Qian,  this  system  was  greatly  expanded.  Stops known  as  caravanserais  helped  service  this  system.  Glassware  and  gold  coins  honoring  Antoninus  Pius were exchanged for textiles along this route, which connected Europe with Asia. For ten points, identify this Chinese trade route cultivated by the Han dynasty.	ANSWER: SilkRoad
The  end  of  this  battle  was  negotiated  at  the  Moore  House  under  the  direction  of  John  Laurens. Charles O’Hara, after being rebuked by two others, gave Benjamin Lincoln his sword at the end of this battle. In the days following this battle, Thomas Graves rescued American Loyalists who had escaped from this battle but was forced to flee rather than face the French fleet. A British band legendarily played “The World Turn’d Upside Down” at, for ten points, what 1781 battle, the last major battle of the American Revolution?	ANSWER: Siege of Yorktown
The death of this empire’s founding ruler Digha Ciss ́e caused a power struggle between his sons Khine and Dyabe; when Dyabe lost, he legendarily sacrificed a virgin to the snake Bida every year until he died. Al-Bakri  wrote  of  dogs  with  golden  collars  in  this  empire,  whose  original  Soninke  name  was  Wagadou. Controlling the salt  and gold trade across the Sahara, this  empire was later absorbed by  Mali.  For ten points, the Gold Coast is presently named for what medieval West African empire?	ANSWER: Ghana(orWagadoubefore mentioned)
This city feuded with the Ercole d’Este[AIR-co-layDES-tay] to protect its salt-mining rights in the Commachio in the Ferrara War. This city guarded one aspect of its trade by preventing its glassmakers from leaving Murano. This city’s conquest of Dalmatia was celebrated by this city every Ascension Day, where the ship Bucentaur would go out to sea and a ring would be dropped into the water. The Marriage of the Sea ritual took place in, for ten points, what Italian “serene republic” that was led by a doge?	ANSWER: Venice
One  of  these  laws  which  was  applied  after  death  was  known  as  mortmain,  or  “the  dead  hand.” Enforcing  these  laws  during  the  ancien  r ́egime  was  outsourced  to  the  paramilitary  General  Farm.  The octroi was one of these laws applied when entering cities, and the corv ́ee was one regarding manual labor. Inconsistent application of one of these laws, the gabelle, resulted in a salt smuggling crisis. The vingti ́eme and taille were sales and land types of, for ten points, what monetary levy?	ANSWER: taxes Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
Robert Landsburg died taking photographs of this event and, in his last moments, laid on top of his backpack to protect its contents. For ten points, name this 1980 in which a volcano in Washington erupted. David Johnston radioed “Vancouver! Vancouver! This is it!” before dying during this event despite being over  six  miles  away.  The  destruction  of  camps  around  Spirit  Lake  as  part  of  this  event  resulted  in  the death of Harry R. Truman. For ten points, name this 1980 event in which the eruption of a Washington volcano decimated the surrounding area.	ANSWER: the eruptionof MountSt.Helens
Jules Michelet gave the first definition of this period in hisHistory of France. Jakob Burkhardt argued that  this  period  gave  birth  to  modern  individuality  inThe Civilization of [this period].  This  period’s reputation  for  cultural  advancement  has  been  challenged  by  historians  who  emphasize  its  nostalgia  for classicism  and continuity with the  Middle Ages.  For  ten points,  name this  era usually  characterized by the flourishing of art and humanism in 15th and 16th century Italy.	ANSWER: The Renaissance
Under this man’s Personalist government, members of the ruling Can Lao party were originally told to keep their memberships secret. This leader reorganized 14,000 villages into “strategic hamlets” in order to secure backing from the countryside. This leader’s unpopularity grew after launching a series of raids on  the  Xa  Loi  Pagoda.  His  downfall  was  precipitated  by  the  self-immolation  of  Buddhist  monk  Thich Quang Duc. For ten points, identify this American-backed president of South Vietnam.	ANSWER: Ngo Dinh Diem
A parable from this work titled “The Eldest Lady’s Tale” is likely an early Cinderella story. A caliph finds a dead body in a chest in a section of this work titled “The Three Apples.” In this work, the slave-girl Morgiana saves her master by pouring boiling oil on thieves hidden in jars. Stories in this collection feature historical figures like Khosrow II and Harun al-Rashid. For ten points, name this collection of stories that features the characters Sinbad the Sailor and Ali Baba.	ANSWER: ArabianNights(acceptOneThousandandOneNights)
In this state, William Fishback helped pass an amendment that banned payment of Holford Bonds. A political family in this state formed after Robert Crittenden broke dueling etiquette. The Conway-Johnson family operated in this state where Joseph Brooks and Elisha Baxter started a “war” for the governorship. The refusal of Orval Faubus to allow integrated schools in this state led Dwight Eisenhower to send in the national guard. For ten points, name this state where, in 1957, nine black students were enrolled in Little Rock Central High School.	ANSWER: Arkansas Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 8
In one anecdote, this book’s author beheaded two women when he was asked to supervise a battle between  180  courtesans.  This  book  postulates  the  following  hierarchy  of  targets:  ideas,  then  alliances, then armies, then cities. This book’s first chapter, about planning, lays out five fundamental factors in its title discipline including seasonal changes and terrain. Understanding battlefield geography is advocated in, for ten points, what strategy book written during the Spring and Autumn Period by Sun Tzu?	ANSWER: The ArtofWar(or Sunzibingfa)
Description acceptable. In the final days of this event, Operation Thunder was called off when Viktor Karpukhin believed there would be too many civilian deaths. This event’s failure led to the suicide of Boris Pugo and arrest of KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov. The State Committee on the State of Emergency was opposed  by  civilians  erecting  barricades  outside  the  Russian  White  House  during  this  event,  where  the Gang of Eight was thwarted by a speech atop a tank given by Boris Yeltsin. For ten points, name this coup that targeted the final leader of the Soviet Union.	ANSWER: AugustCoup  (orAugustPutsch;  accept  descriptions  of  the  1991coupagainst  Mikhail Gorbachev)
This woman was represented by James Bradwell after she was involuntarily committed to Bellevue Place. This woman accused Elizabeth Keckley of violating her privacy by publishingBehind the Scenes. William Mumler took a photograph of this woman that supposedly shows the ghost of her dead husband in the background. Edwin Stanton ordered this woman to be removed from a room in the Peterson House, as she was too emotional over the shooting of her husband. For ten points, name this First Lady during the Civil War.	ANSWER: Mary (Ann) ToddLincoln(accept either or both surnames)
This country is referenced as the “Island of St. Lawrence” in early maps, and it was the last stop on  a  route  known  as  the  “pirate  round.”  This  island’s  largest  tourist  site  is  its  island  of  Nosy  Be,  and it contains a large area of karst pinnacles in its Tsingy de Bemaraha National Park. This country is the home  of  the  Merina  ethnic  group,  who  introduced  a  language  in  the  Malayo-Polynesian  family  to  this country. For ten points, name this former French island colony off the southeast coast of Africa.	ANSWER: Madagascar
One  member  of  this  family  was  the  target  of  the  unsuccessful  August  Faction  incident  to  remove him  from  office.  Another  of  this  family’s  members  pursued  thesongunpolicy  and  violated  an  Agreed Framework  that  he  had  signed  with  Madeleine  Albright.  One  member  of  this  family  built  a  cult  of personality glorifying Mount Paektu and introduced the state ideology ofJuche. For ten points, name this family that, for three generations, has ruled North Korea.	ANSWER: Kimfamily Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
The Yakama peoples’ access to this industry was upheld in the Supreme Court caseU.S. v. Winans. Under  Grover  Cleveland, the  Retaliation  Act  and  the  Bayard-Chamberlain  Treaty  dealt  with  a  dispute concerning this industry. Along with settling theAlabamaclaims, the 1871 Treaty of Washington allowed Americans  access  to  this  industry  around  Nova  Scotia.  The  Grand  Banks  region  has  been  a  historical hotbed  of,  for  ten  points,  what  industry  whose  recreational  “fly”  version  was  popularized  by  Ernest Hemingway and other anglers?	ANSWER: fishing industry
Demonstrators  for  this  cause  gained  sympathy  after  the  televised  Santa  Cruz  massacre.  After  the success of this cause, Xanana Gusm ̃ao[sha-na-nagoos-mao] was released from prison and won an ensuing election.  This  cause  gained  international  recognition  after  Carlos  Bela  and  Jose  Ramos-Horta  won  the 1996  Nobel  Peace  Prize  for  their  advocacy  of  it.  Fretilin  fought  for  this  cause,  which  was  assisted  by UN-backed Australian intervention. For ten points, name this cause that succeeded after Indonesian forces ended their 23-year occupation of a neighboring territory.	ANSWER: independenceofEastTimorfrom  Indonesia  (orindependenceof(theDemocratic Republicof )Timor-Leste;  accept  equivalents,  likefreeingEastTimorfromIndonesia;  accept descriptions of endingtheIndonesianoccupationofEastTimorbefore “Indonesia” is read; prompt on partial answers like “freeing East Timor” without mention of Indonesia or the word “independence”)
This man’s namesake company created an advertisement that played off Emanuel Leutze’sWestward the Course of Empire Takes its Way. This man sued John Henry Manny over patent infringement, but lost to a team of lawyers that included Edwin Stanton and Abraham Lincoln. This man drove rival Obed Hussey  out  of  business  by  obtaining  the  rights  to  a  cutter-bar  mechanism.  An  1837  invention  of  this man helped Midwest farmers harvest wheat more efficiently. For ten points, name this businessman and inventor of the mechanical reaper.	ANSWER: Cyrus Hall McCormick
This  man  wrote  that  the  U.S.  “gives  to  bigotry  no  sanction,  to  persecution  no  assistance”  in  a letter to the Touro Synagogue in Newport. Lewis Nicola sent this man a letter advocating the styling of a  monarchy;  that  Newburgh  Letter  was  written  a  year  before  this  man  dissolved  the  mostly  unrelated Newburgh Conspiracy. A letter claiming that this man was a “weak general” was sent to Horatio Gates by  Thomas  Conway,  who  led  a  “cabal”  calling  for  this  man  to  be  replaced.  For  ten  points,  name  this president who wrote many letters from his home in Mount Vernon.	ANSWER: George Washington
The  northernmost  point  of  this  structure  was  Limestone  Corner,  which  was  built  at  the  site  of Milecastle 30. TheVallumwas a ditch found near this structure, which was built before a similar structure intended to repel the Caledonians. The River Tyne was one endpoint of this structure, which was largely made of turf and built years before a structure further north was begun by Antoninus Pius. For ten points, name this defensive structure built by the third of the Five Good Emperors in Britain.	ANSWER: Hadrian’sWall Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 8
Evidence from the Bradford Letter argues that a performance ofCatoin this location was a lavish social  event,  not  a  celebration  of  republicanism.  In  this  location,  a  manual  nicknamed  the  Blue  Book was translated into English. Christopher Ludwick developed a type of Pepper Pot Soup at this location, where Baron von Steuben led training drills. For ten points, name this Pennsylvania location where the Continental Army spent the harsh 1777-1778 winter.	ANSWER: ValleyForge(prompt on Pennsylvania before read)
This  man  was  forced  into  exile  after  Publius  Clodius  Pulcher  passed  a  law  targeting  those  who executed Roman citizens without trial. He rose to prominence by successfully prosecuting Gaius Verres. As  consul,  he  exposed  the  Catiline  Conspiracy  to  the  Senate  and  was  awarded  the  titlePater  Patriae. For ten points, name this politician, a staunch supporter of the Roman Republic and notable orator who opposed Mark Antony with hisPhilippics.	ANSWER: Marcus Tullius Cicero
The  third  stanza  of  this  poem  describes  the  image  of  a  horse  wading  a  river  around  a  steadfast stone. The speaker of this poem twice notes his use of “polite meaningless words” in conversation. Three stanzas of this poem close with the words “a terrible beauty is born.” The speaker references MacDonagh, MacBride, Connolly and Pearse, who were executed by the British. For ten points, name this poem by William Butler Yeats that commemorates the leaders of a failed Irish uprising.	ANSWER: ”Easter,1916”
This  man  appointed  the  British  “White  Rat,”  Bob  Astles,  as  head  of  his  anti-corruption  unit.  He renamed  the  presidential  home  “the  command  post”  and  instituted  the  State  Research  Bureau  secret police. This man was overthrown after attempting to seize the region of Kagera from Tanzania. Earlier, this successor of Milton Obote and suspected cannibal expelled all Asians from his country. For ten points, name this dictator of Uganda from 1971 to 1979.	ANSWER: Idi AminDada
This  man  secretly  negotiated  with  Karl  Wolff  in  Operation  Sunrise.  According  to  legend,  after  a failure by this man’s organization, JFK wanted to “splinter [it] into a thousand pieces and scatter it into the winds.” This member of the Warren Commission organized a coup with Kermit Roosevelt that sought to  oust  Mohammad  Mosaddegh  in  Iran.  The  Bay  of  Pigs  invasion  was  plotted  by,  for  ten  points,  what Director of the CIA under Eisenhower and Kennedy?	ANSWER: Allen (Welsh)Dulles(prompt on Dulles) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
Description acceptable. The central figure of this controversy cried “Is there an epidemic of cholera or something?” and “What is it, do you have rocket launching pads there?” before trying to explain “This is the situation I am in – your guest.” This controversy was the fault of the Los Angeles Police, who were supposedly unable to guarantee that guest’s security while his wife, Nina, and his children were to visit “Main Street, USA” and ride the spinning teacups. For ten points, name this 1959 foreign relations gaffe in  which  the  visiting  Soviet  premier  was  denied  a  visit  to  the  “Happiest  Place  on  Earth,”  a  California theme park.	ANSWER:  Nikita Khrushchevbeing  denied  a  trip  toDisneyland  (accept  answers  that  mention Khrushchevvisiting/not being allowed to visit theDisneytheme park, but do not accept mentions of “(Walt) Disney World” because that is specifically in Florida and not open for another decade; prompt on partial answers)
This city hosted a 1935 exposition which featured the Richard Requa designed Old Globe Theatre. In 1995, Shawn Nelson was arrested after stealing a tank from an armory in this city. This city’s Miramar neighborhood  was  the  original  home  of  the  Navy’s  TOPGUN  program.  The  USSMidwayMuseum  is located in this city, across from the resort town of Coronado. Balboa Park is located in, for ten points, what Southern California city that borders Chula Vista and Tijuana?	ANSWER: SanDiego
This was the site of a massacre perpetrated by Yamaji Motoharu following victory at the Battle of Lushunkou. In a later conflict, this location was the site of a poorly executed night attack that managed to  only  disable  thePalladaandRetvizan.  Togo  Heihachiro  planned  a  surprise  attack  on  this  location in  an  attempt  to  destroy  Oskar  Stark’s  Pacific  Fleet  on  the  second  day  of  a  war.  For  ten  points,  what Manchurian harbor was attacked to mark the beginning of the Russo-Japanese War?	ANSWER: PortArthur(orLushunCity  or  Port;  acceptRyojun;  acceptLushunkou;  prompt  on Manchuria before mentioned; prompt on the Liaodong Peninsula)
This  woman’s  husband  died  18  days  after  she  did,  allegedly  refusing  to  eat  out  of  grief.  This  rival of  Lilian  Smith  was  left  partially  paralyzed  after  a  train  accident  in  Lexington,  North  Carolina.  Frank Butler married this woman after she defeated him in a competition involving 25 targets. Her talent was discovered  at  age  8  when  she  downed  a  squirrel  with  a  bullet  to  the  head.  For  ten  points,  name  this prominent American sharpshooter, nicknamed “Little Sure Shot” as a member of Buffalo Bill’s Wild West Show.	ANSWER: AnnieOakley(or Phoebe AnneMosey)
This event was presaged by an Emily Hobhouse “open letter” that asked “is it not our mission to preserve  life?”  A  similar-but-unsuccessful  attempt  at  this  event  was  Benedict  XV’s[fifteenth’s]  “Truce of  God.”  A  football  game  at  Messines  was  speculated  to  have  taken  place  during  this  event,  whose participants crossed No Man’s Land to sing songs and swap rations with each other instead of bullets. For ten points, name this festive event during the winter of 1914 in which German and Allied forces stopped fighting.	ANSWER: Christmasceasefireof World War I (accept descriptions of atruceor any sort of pause in fighting on Christmas1914) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 8
One leader of this state, John McKinly, was captured in bed by the British. The Swedish settlement of Fort Christina is located in this state. This state disputed a small tract known as the Wedge with its northern  neighbor  until  1921.  Until  it  gained  an  independent  legislature  in  1701,  it  was  known  as  the “Three Lower Counties.” This state’s northern border is an arc centered on the courthouse in New Castle, the Twelve-Mile Circle, and its western border is the Mason-Dixon line. For ten points, name this small Mid-Atlantic state where an 1861 vote against secession from the Union was taken in Dover.	ANSWER: Delaware
A videotape showing this man with Thomas Youk ends with this man challenging the authorities to convict him. Shortly after this man worked with Janet Adkins, the state of Michigan revoked his license. This man employed the use of the Mercitron and the Thanatron to deliver, respectively, carbon monoxide or an IV drip of lethal medicine. For ten points, name this doctor who, in 1999, was convicted of murder and served eight years in prison for his role in over one hundred physician-assisted suicides.	ANSWER: Dr. Jack Kevorkian(prompt on Dr. Death)
This composer wrote the piece “A new song we raise” in response to the execution of Johann Esch and  Heinrich  Voes.  J.S.  Bach  wrote  a  set  of  canonic  variations  on  his  Christmas  piece  “Vom  himmel hoch.” Another of his hymns was quoted in the finale of Felix Mendelssohn’s fifth symphony, written for the 300th anniversary of the Augsburg Confession. “A Mighty Fortress is Our God” was written by, for ten  points,  what  German  whose  hymns  and  other  religious  writings,  including  the  Ninety-Five  Theses, helped initiate the Protestant Reformation?	ANSWER: Martin Luther
This organization defended its unorthodox contractual procedure in a court case against Iain Fraser. It  is  currently  lead  by  Don  Garber  and  unofficially  runs  the  Cascadia  Cup.  Its  first  ever  match  was contested  between  San  Jose  Clash  and  DCU  at  Spartan  Stadium,  and  it  grew  out  of  the  failed  NASL. This league’s Designated Player rule has allowed David Villa, Kaka, and other imports to join it, as its attractiveness to foreigners grew following David Beckham’s transfer to the LA Galaxy. For ten points, name this modern American soccer league.	ANSWER: MajorLeagueSoccer(orMLS)
As part of this policy, Raycom Sports planned a football game between USC and Illinois in Dynamo Stadium. This policy led to the success of the Phosphorite War. The anti-Stalinist novelChildren of the Arbatwas allowed to be published under this system. Along with a policy translated as “restructuring,” this policy helped lead to the independence of many constituent republics of the Eastern Bloc. For ten points,  name  this  policy  under  Mikhail  Gorbachev  that  advocated  for  greater  freedom  of  speech  and government transparency and comes from the Russian word for “openness.”	ANSWER: glasnost(prompt on “openness” before read) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 8
This  commander  argued  for  the  release  of  German  soldiers  in  World  War  II,  noting  that  he  had given orders similar to the ones the Germans were in prison for. This victor at the battle of Wonju was noted for his defensive use of artillery against human wave attacks, granting his strategy the nickname of  “meatgrinder.”  This  commander  of  the  Eighth  Army  assumed  his  highest  post  at  the  Wake  Island Conference  after  Harry  Truman  had  removed  his  predecessor.  For  ten  points,  name  this  successor  of Douglas MacArthur in the Korean War.	ANSWER: Matthew Ridgway
The day before 2004 elections on this island, Annette Lu and Chen Shui-bian were shot. After easier negotiations for part of Liaodong and the Penghu Islands, China begrudgingly granted Japan control of this  island  in  the  1895  Treaty  of  Shimonoseki.  Lee  Teng-hui  once  served  as  president  of  a  government that rules this island, where Tsai Ing-wen was elected president in 2016.. For ten points, name this island, formerly known as Formosa, that, since 1949, has been home to the government of the People’s Republic of China.	ANSWER: Taiwan(acceptFormosabefore mentioned; do not accept Republic of China)
A  Polish  World  War  II  refugee  is  hired  by  the  McIntyre  family  in  this  author’s  “The  Displaced Person.” One of this author’s characters forms the “Holy Church of Christ Without Christ” to rival the street preaching of atheist World War II veteran Hazel Motes. In another of this author’s stories, Julian resents his racist mother, yet accompanies her on the bus to the Y. For ten points, name this Southern Gothic author ofWise Bloodand the collectionEverything that Rises Must ConvergeandA Good Man is Hard to Find.	ANSWER: Flannery O’Connor
Nell  Gwynn  was  one  of  many  women  to  have  had  affairs  with  this  man,  who  hid  in  an  oak  tree near  Boscobel  House  to  avoid  capture  after  the  Battle  of  Worcester.  During  this  man’s  rule,  non-allied ministers  were  banned  from  coming  within  five  miles  of  their  former  parishes  as  part  of  the  Clarendon Code, passed by the Cavalier Parliament. The Great Fire of London struck during the reign of, for ten points, what restored Stuart monarch whose father was beheaded during the English Civil War?	ANSWER: CharlesII
Due to his cruelty, this man was replaced by Francisco de Bobadilla in a position that he had been granted by the Capitulations of Santa Fe. This man outlined what he was owed by the Spanish Crown in  theBook of Privileges.  This  man  forced  the  Taino  to  pay  him  tribute  after  colonizing  their  home, which was later named Hispaniola. For ten points, name this Italian explorer whose voyages, funded by Ferdinand and Isabella, led to Spanish colonization in the New World.	ANSWER: ChristopherColumbus(or CristobalColon) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 8
This  man  criticized  the  use  of  wet  nurses  and  advocated  for  breastfeeding  by mothers in a 1752 thesis titled Nutrix Noverca. This man had to flee Hamburg after angering its mayor when he declared that a seven-headed hydra corpse he possessed was fake. Peter Forsskål,  who  died  while  on  an  expedition  in  Yemen,  was  among  the  seventeen  dedicated “apostles” of  this man. The  author of Systema  Naturae,  for  ten  points,  what  Swedish naturalist is often called the “father of modern taxonomy"?	ANSWER: Carl Linnaeus (or Carolus Linnaeus; accept Carolus a Linné)
King  Pyrrhus  of  Epirus  used  the  excuse  of  enrolling  his  heirs  in  this  program  to justify  an  invasion  of  the  Peloponesse.  A  trip  to  Crete  inspired  the  semi-mythical  figure Lycurgus  [[lye-KUR-guss]]  to  introduce  this  system,  including  the  use  of  a  common  mess hall  and  a  restriction  on  bathing.  This  system,  which  was  often  led  by  more  experienced men  known  as paidonomoi,  was  chronicled  by  the  Athenian  Xenophon,  who  put  his  own sons into this program while serving as a mercenary. The youth of Sparta were subjected to, for ten points, what twenty year program of militaristic training?	ANSWER: Agoge [[ah-GOH-gay]] (or Agōgā)
This act was meant to pressure another country into repealing its Orders in Council. This act was opposed by Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin, who proposed Macon’s Bill  Number  One  as  an  alternative.  This act  was  passed  in  response  to  the Chesapeake- Leopard Affair  and  was  represented  in  a  comic  depicting  a  snapping  turtle  biting  the backside of a man who complains, “This cursed Ograbme." For ten points, name this act, promoted  by  Thomas  Jefferson,  that  blocked  foreign  trade  in  response  to  British  naval impressment.	ANSWER: Embargo Act of 1807
This man deployed diplomat Afanasiy Pushkin to negotiate an "Eternal Peace" with the delegates of Charles IX [[the ninth]]. Dionysus the Grammarian attempted to unseat this man from power by convincing one ruler to divorce this counselor's sister, Irina. This man, Feodor   Nikitich   Romanov,   and   Vasili   Shuiski   served   on   the   advisory   council   which effectively  ran  the  nation  for  the  son  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  Feodor  I.  The  Time  of  Troubles began following the death of, for ten points, which non-Rurikid tsar?	ANSWER: Boris Godunov (or Borís Fyodorovich Godunóv; accept either underlined portion)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 10
Elders  from  this  group  read  scripture  underneath  multi-colored  umbrellas  on a holiday  known  as  Sigd,  or  Mehlella.  In  one  country,  the  "Blood  Bank  Affair"  banned  these people  from  giving  blood  out  of  fear  of  HIV.  Operations  Joshua  and  Solomon  airlifted  this group to one country, at the time led by Yitzhak Shamir. Members of this group who convert to Christianity to seek a better life are called Falash Mura. Referred to as "exiles" in Amharic, for  ten  points,  what  minority  religious  community  has  largely  emigrated  to  Israel  from Africa?	ANSWER: Ethiopian Jews (accept Beta Israel; accept Falash Mura or Falashas before "Falash"; prompt on "Jews")
One theory claims the bones of this figure were stolen by several Yale alumni led by Prescott  Bush  while  serving  as  Army  volunteers  at  Ft.  Sill.  The  distribution  of mezcal was used  by  Mexican  soldiers  to  massacre  this  chief's  soldiers  at  Casas  Grandes  in  Chihuahua. Multiple escape attempts by this figure were followed by his formal surrender to Nelson A. Miles  in  Arizona.  A  military  leader  of  the Bedonkohe Apache  was,  for  ten  points,  what  man whose name is shouted by paratroopers when jumping out of planes?	ANSWER: Geronimo (or Goyaalé)
Eric  Nilles  and  Anil  Menon  conducted  a  2020  study  of  thousands  of  employees  at this  company,  revealing  that  COVID-19  infection  rates  were  lower  in  those  who  already contracted the disease. The Technical University of Munich's engineering team won all four iterations  of  the  Hyperloop  competition  hosted  by  this  company.  Amateur  astronomer  Bill Gray  revealed  that,  in  early  2022,  the  remnants  of  this  company's Falcon  9  were  slated  to collide with the moon. The colonization of Mars is the end goal held by, for ten points, what extra-terrestrial exploration company founded by Elon Musk?	ANSWER: SpaceX (or Space Exploration Technologies Corporation)
This  researcher  studied  the  cultures  he  labelled  "Totemic  societies,"  including  the Australian  Aborigines  and  the  Pueblo,  in  his  work The  Elementary  Forms  of  the  Religious Life. This man considered the trial of Socrates a "necessary release of social tensions" and "a useful prelude to reforms" in Athens in The Rules of the Sociological Method. The concept of anomie is used to illustrate reasons one may commit the title action in, for ten points, which French sociologist's work Suicide?	ANSWER: Emile Durkheim (or David Emile Durkheim)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 10
While serving in the Army Air Corps, this composer was commissioned to write his Cello   Concerto for   Raya   Garbousova   [[gahr-boh-SOH-vah]]   by   the   Boston   Symphony Orchestra.  Olin  Downes  faced  intense  criticism  after  a New  York  Times review  praising  a string  orchestra  work  by  this  composer,  taken  from  a  movement  of  his String Quartet in B minor. That piece by this composer was played during the announcements of the deaths of Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  and  John  F.  Kennedy.  Arturo  Toscanini  premiered  a piece  by,  for  ten points, what American composer of Adagio for Strings?	ANSWER: Samuel Barber (or Samuel Osborne Barber II)
The  book The  Man  Who  Never  Was details  an  effort  during  this  campaign  that involved Ewen Montagu’s goading of one side to divert troops to another country. During this  campaign,  Operation  Avalanche  targeted  the  western  part  of  its  central region.  Harold Alexander  led  an  Army  Group  that  oversaw  this  campaign  which  forced  Adolf  Hitler  to abandon  a  planned  Kursk  Offensive  and  reinforce  its  central  area.  During  this  campaign, Generals  Patton  and  Montgomery  engaged  in  a  race  to  see  who  could  first  reach  Messina. For ten points, name this Allied campaign to capture an Italian island.	ANSWER: Allied Invasion of Sicily (prompt on partial answers; accept synonyms for Invasion such as Attack; accept Sicilia in place of Sicily; accept Operation Husky; accept Operation Avalanche before mentioned)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 10
Edward VII once visited this man’s summer estate of Clifton, where he often met with  Union  officials.  Benjamin  Moore  was  an  early  business  partner  of  this  man  who  used Conestoga wagons to run a wholesaling business. This Quaker made the bulk of his fortune in the railroad industry before allocating $7 million in his bequest for the establishment of an  orphanage,  hospital,  and  institution  that  bears  his  name.  For  ten  points,  name  this philanthropist who established a namesake university in Baltimore.	ANSWER: Johns Hopkins
At  the  beginning  of  these  wars,  six  legions  successfully  defeated  and  subdued  the Helvetii [[hel-WEH-tih-ee]] tribe at Bibracte [[bee-BRAHK-teh]]. To support the Ubii [[OOH- bih-ee]]  during  these  wars,  a  general  built  movable  wooden  bridges  to  retaliate  against raiding  tribes  across  the  Rhine  River.  A  member  of  the  First  Triumvirate  recorded  his victory over Vercingetorix [[ver-sin-JEH-tuh-riks]] at the Siege of Alesia during these wars. Julius Caesar wrote Commentaries on, for ten points, what set of “wars'' during which Rome conquered modern-day France?	ANSWER: Gallic Wars (accept Roman Conquest of Gaul or equivalents)
An  interruption  in  the  flow  of  this  work  featured  an  interlude  by  Ramón  Raquello [[rah-KWEH-yoh]]  and  his  Orchestra.  In  this  work,  a  disturbance  at  Grover's  Mill  leads  to the exclamation “Good Heavens” after the appearance of a figure resembling a “gray snake.” The Mercury Theater created an updated version of a text that formed the basis of this 1938 work, which was meant to coincide with Halloween. Mass panic resulted from the airing of, for ten points, what radio drama by Orson Welles detailing an alien invasion?	ANSWER: The War of the Worlds radio drama broadcast
In a dissent in this case, one Justice claimed that the central entity was “not simply another 'idea' or 'point of view' competing for recognition in the marketplace of ideas.” The defendant  in  this  case  was  a  member  of  the  Revolutionary  Communist  Youth  Brigade  who engaged  in  the  central  action  during  the  1984  Republican  National  Convention  protests. Prior  to  this  case,  48  states  banned  the  desecration  of  the  central  object.  For  ten  points, name this Supreme Court case which overturned laws against the burning of the American flag.	ANSWER: Texas v. Gregory Lee Johnson (prompt on partial answer)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 1
This  procedure  was  originally  developed  to  provide  a  source  of  ammonia  for explosives, and the wife of this procedure's primary creator is thought to have killed herself over guilt at her husband's involvement in Germany's chemical warfare program. Both men for whom this process is named received Nobel Prizes, the first for its discovery in 1918 and the  second  for  expanding  its  scale  in  1931.  For  ten  points,  name  this  nitrogen  fixation process which consumes more than one percent of humanity's energy production and helps feed one third of the world's population.	ANSWER: Haber-Bosch Process
This man examined corruption in San Francisco’s Office of Economic Opportunity in a  work  often  paired  with  another chronicling  a meeting  that  Leonard  Bernstein  hosted  for the  Black  Panthers.  Chuck  Yeager  claims  that  a  monkey  will  be  the  first  traveler  in  the Mercury Program in a speech dramatized by this man in a book centered on the Space Race. Ken Kesey’s LSD use is central to another work by this author titled The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test. For ten points, name this proponent of New Journalism who wrote The Right Stuff.	ANSWER: Tom Wolfe
In  a  defense  against  treason  to  the  crown,  this  man  claimed,  "Life,  without  the dignity of an intelligent being, is not worth having." This man founded the Exovedate [[eks- oh-veh-DAHT]],  though  his  men  lost  at  the  Battles  of  Fish  Creek  and  Batoche  [[bah- TOHSH]].  Big  Bear  and  Gabriel  Dumont  joined  this  man,  who  was  the  only  parliament member  to  miss  the  Pacific  Scandal  debate.  John  A.  MacDonald  ordered  this  man's  trial  in Regina  [[reh-JAI-nah]]  after  the  Northwest  Rebellion.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Manitoban Métis [[MEH-tee]] leader.	ANSWER: Louis "David" Riel
This ballet's eight movements were included on Bill Frisell’s album “Have a Little Faith.” This ballet was commissioned by Lincoln Kerstein and was premiered in 1938 by a company headed by Eugene Loring. Tunes including “Great Grandad” and “Goodbye Old Paint” appear in this ballet, which opens and closes with a theme titled “The Open Prairie.” A song about the “Old Chisholm Trail” appears in this ballet, in which the title character steals a warden's gun and escapes jail before being shot and killed. For ten points, name this Aaron Copland ballet about a Wild West outlaw.	ANSWER: Billy the Kid  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 1
Jaroslava  Moserová  [[yah-roh-SLAH-vah moh-seh-roh-VAH]]  was  a  burns  specialist who  treated  one  patient  after  this  event  whose  actions  were  followed  by  those  of  Márton Moyses  and  Evzen  Plocek  [[PLOH-chek]].  This  event  was  caused  by  the  enactment  of  a program  during  Victorious  February  which  led  to  liberalization  in  the  Action  Programme, referred  to  as  "Socialism  with  a  human  face."  Jan  Palach  [[YAHN  pah-LAHK]]  immolated himself after this event. For ten points, name these 1968 reforms by Alexander Dubček [[DOOB-chek]] in Czechoslovakia.	ANSWER: Prague Spring (accept Pražské jaro; accept Pražská jar)
A 1964 Supreme Court decision dealt with the constitutionality of whether this state could prohibit theaters from running Louis Malle’s film The Lovers. A case originating in this state gave rise to the “imminent lawless action” test and arose after a reporter was asked to cover a KKK rally. The Brandenburg case arose in this state which was found to be subject to the  exclusionary  rule.  The  Supreme  Court  ruled  that  prosecutors  could  not  use  evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment in, for ten points, what state, the defendant in the Mapp case?	ANSWER: Ohio   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 1
During this battle, the Knyphausen Detachment failed to mount a counterattack due to malfunctioning guns. The call sign “Victory or Death” was used for one side in this battle which benefited from Johann Rall’s reluctance to send out a patrol in bad weather. Followed shortly by an engagement at Princeton, this battle was made possible by one side’s nighttime crossing of the Delaware River. For ten points, name this Christmas Day battle in which the Hessians were surprised by George Washington.	ANSWER: Battle ofTrenton
The  Madden  Committee  investigated  this  event  for  which  Roman  Rudenko  claimed  the  Germans should  be  held  responsible.  Zbigniew  [ZBIG-nyef]  Brzezinski  visited  a  memorial  to  the  victims  of  this event  at  the  invitation  of  Mikhail  Gorbachev.  The  crimes  from  this  event  also  occurred  at  Kalinin  and Kharkiv prisons. Resulting in over 22,000 deaths, this event was conducted by the NKVD in 1940. For ten points, name this mass execution of Polish officers by the Red Army during World War Two.	ANSWER:KatynMassacre
As  chair  of  the  Second  Bretton  Woods  Conference,  this  man  proposed  an  International  Clearing Union. This man was opposed by the “Heavenly Twins” at the Paris Peace Conference. This economist’s argument for deficit spending was the inspiration for Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal policies. For ten points, name this economist who argued against the Treaty of Versailles in The Economic Consequences of the Peace.	ANSWER: John MaynardKeynes
In the trial resulting from this event, Max Steuer discredited a testimony that was repeated numerous times by Kate Alterman, helping to eventually acquit Max Blanck and Isaac Harris. People like Josephine Goldmark  and  Rose  Schneiderman  used  this  event  to  campaign  for  better  working  conditions.  For  ten points, name this 1911 disaster that saw the death of 146 workers in the Asch building of a namesake New York City garment factory.	ANSWER:Triangle ShirtwaistFactory Fire
This city is the birthplace of Juliette Gordon Low, John C. Fremont and songwriter Johnny Mercer. This city’s First African Baptist Church began meeting in 1773 and claims to be the first black Baptist congregation  in North  America. The  oldest  standing rail  facility  in the  U.S.  is located  in this  city  that also hosted the 1996 Olympic sailing competition. For ten points, name this city found on the Yamacraw Bluff, on the site of the 1733 landing of James Oglethorpe, the original colonial capital of Georgia.	ANSWER:Savannah, Georgia Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
The flag of this city features a mine shaft and furnace, representing its place as the mining capital of the Russian empire. This city was founded by Vasily Tatischev and Georg Wilhelm de Gennin as an iron plant in 1723. This city, named for the wife of the Tsar at the time of its founding, is home to the Church of the Blood on the former site of the Ipatiev House. For ten points, name this second-largest Siberian city, formerly known as Sverdlosk, where the Romanov family was executed.	ANSWER:Yekaterinburg(acceptSverdloskbefore mentioned)
One section of this book claims that philosophy was only possible as a result of the development of leisure and that “vain and erroneous” Greeks had aided the forces of darkness. This book’s frontispiece depicts the title figure made up of several smaller men. This book claims that before the establishment of its title figure, life was “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.” For ten points, name this book of political philosophy by Thomas Hobbes which advocates for an absolute monarchy.	ANSWER:Leviathanor The Matter, Forme and Power of a Common-Wealth Ecclesiasticall and Civil
This man took one post after the death of Frank Knox, often arguing with colleague Henry Stimson over deployment of supplies to the Pacific. This man left a note citing Ajax by Sophocles shortly before committing suicide by jumping out of a window. After the passing of the National Security Act of 1947, the posts of Secretary of the Army, Navy, and Air Force were merged into a single position that this man became the first to assume. For ten points, name this first US Secretary of Defense.	ANSWER: JamesForrestal
Most  of  the  victims  of  this  event  were  killed  in  a  location  whose  name  was  inspired  by  a  Jacques Offenbach operetta, during a performance by the band Eagles of Death Metal. Retaliation for an airstrike known as Operation Chammal was cited as the motive for this event whose target locations included the Bataclan theater. Saleh Abdeslam fled to Brussels after this event which was declared an act of war by Francois Hollande. 137 people were killed in, for ten points, what series of attacks in 2015?	ANSWER: November 2015ParisAttacks (accept any answers that indicate the violence inParis, accept Bataclanbefore mentioned)
During this event, a friendly contest was proposed to determine which country had the best cheese. Attendants  to  this  event  included  Viscount  Castlereagh  and  the  Prince  of  Talleyrand.  Klemens  von Metternich led this event, which was completed after a decisive victory for the Duke of Wellington. For ten points, name this 1814-15 meeting between the powers of Europe to decide how to maintain the balance of power after Napoleon’s defeat.	ANSWER:CongressofVienna Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 9
These people lived inwharenuior big houses, some of which ban food inside. Nephrite jade weapons called  punamu  were  used  by  these  people,  who  built  a  defensive  settlement,  or  Pa,  at  Mount  Eden. Continuation  of  these  people’stikanga,  or  customs,  may  have  led  to  devastating  raids  into  the  Bay  of Plenty led by Hongi Hika with new found firearms. A subgroup of these people, the Moriori settled in the Chatham  Islands,  while  the  main  group  of  these  people  signed  the  Treaty  of  Waitangi.  For  ten  points, name these Polynesian indigenous people of New Zealand.	ANSWER: The Maoripeople
This  institution  controversially  withdrew  from  funding  a  poster  of  Ronald  Haeberle’s  photograph of  the  My  Lai  massacre  with  the  overlaid  caption  “And  babies.”  In  2012,  this  institution  addedflOw, Canabalt,Myst,Katamari Damacyand ten other video games to its collection. Jasper Johns’Flag, Marc Chagall’sI and the Village, and Picasso’sLes Demoiselles d’Avignonare part of the collection of, for ten points, what New York art museum that focuses on contemporary art and design?	ANSWER: MuseumofModernArt(orMoMA)
This activist was sentence to one month of hard labor after assisting Amelia Brown in throwing a shoe at H. H. Asquith. In one photo, this woman is shown toasting with a glass of grape juice in front of a flag with two rows of stars on it. This woman organized a 1913 procession led by a crown-wearing Inez Milholland atop a white horse. With Crystal Eastman, this woman co-wrote an amendment that has yet to be adopted by the United States. The Equal Rights Amendment was drafted by, for ten points, what activist who, with Lucy Burns, founded the National Woman’s Party.	ANSWER: Alice Stokes Paul
This man supposedly went into battle unprotected, believing that “the Lord God [was his] armor.” French aid in the Treaty of Barwalde allowed this man to launch an intervention in Germany. Chancellor Axel Oxenstierna ruled in place of this man after he was killed leading a cavalry charge at L ̈utzen. This father of Christina became known as the “Lion of the North” after winning the Battle of Breitenfeld. For ten points, identify this king of Sweden during the Thirty Years’ War.	ANSWER: GustavusAdolphus(acceptGustavIIAdolph, prompt on partial answers)
In Canada, sites for this project included the Eldorado Mine and Chalk River. Dupont’s P-9 Project produced  substances  for  this  project,  for  which  Kenneth  Nicholas  helped  buy  pitchblende  ore  from  the Belgian Congo. Washington’s Hanford Site was one complex operated by this project, whose final products were designed and tested at a site in New Mexico, Los Alamos. For ten points, name this Allied project to produce the atomic bomb.	ANSWER: ManhattanProject Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
In the precursor to this case, Samuel Russell’s testimony was ruled hearsay and he hired Samuel Bay. In this case, 7 justices refused to abide byMarie  Louise  v.  Marotdespite the opinion of John McLean. Robert  Cooper  Grier  was  pressured  by  James  Buchanan  to  side  with  the  majority  in  this  case.  The majority decision in this case ruled that Congress cannot ban slavery in certain territories as it infringes on the right to property. For ten points, name this 1857 case in which Roger Taney ruled that an enslaved man was not free because he spent time in Wisconsin.	ANSWER: Dred Scottv. Sandford
One historian described this government as “the past that will not pass” in a book about the memory of this government, titled its “Syndrome.” This government studied by Henry Rousso and Robert Paxton ran the Drancy internment camp and carried out the Vel d’Hiv roundup against its Jewish population. Formed  after  the  Second  Armistice  at  Compi ́egne,  for  ten  points,  name  this  government  led  by  Pierre Laval and Phillip P ́etain which collaborated with the Nazis in WWII.	ANSWER: VichyFrance
The  Dawn  of  Liberty  monument  in  this  country  commemorates  the  1986  Jeltoqsan  riots.  Its  not Belarus,  but  a  protocol  signed  in  its  former  capital  was  a  founding  document  of  the  Commonwealth  of Independent States. This country is home to a nuclear test site nicknamed “The Polygon” at Semipalatinsk and the world’s largest spaceport at Baikonur. In 2019, this country renamed its capital to Nur-Sultan. For ten points, name this country once led by Nursultan Nazarbayev from Astana.	ANSWER: Kazakhstan
A racist and comically incompetent former owner of this team names a rule banning NBA teams from trading their first round draft pick from consecutive drafts. Current owner Dan Gilbert wrote a letter in Comic Sans stating that this team will “win an NBA championship before the self-titled former “King” wins  one.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  team  that  drafted  Anthony  Bennett,  Andrew  Wiggins,  and  Kyrie Irving while its biggest star, LeBron James, took his four year sabbatical in Miami.	ANSWER: ClevelandCavaliers(accept either or both names)
A leader at this location wrote a letter to “All Americans in the World” in which he claimed he was determined to die like a soldier. James Neill, appalled by the lack of supplies at this location, wrote to the provisional government saying “If there has ever been a dollar here I have no knowledge of it.” This location was said to be key to keeping “Bexar out of the hands of the enemy” in a letter by James Bowie who claimed its defense was necessary for the salvation of Texas. For ten points, name this mission in San Atonio that was besieged by Mexiacn forces.	ANSWER: The Alamo Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 9
Barbara Jordan and Zell Miller gave keynote addresses during party national conventions held in this specific location. In 1982, Sun Myung Moon held the first Blessing Ceremony of the Unification Church outside  of Korea  in  this  location,  conducting  a  mass  wedding in  which  2,500 people  were  married. The Hulu Theater at this location is currently slated for demolition as part of plans to expand nearby Penn Station. For ten points, identify this New York City concert hall and sporting venue named for the fourth president.	ANSWER: MadisonSquareGarden(orMSG; prompt on partial answers; prompt on New York City before read)
This  period  of  time  provides  the  nickname  of  the  queen  Elizabeth  Stuart,  the  eldest  daughter  of James I. During this period of time in 1947, Manny Shinwell was vilified by the British public for failing to  maintain  adequate  supplies  of  coal.  The  headline  “Crisis?  What  crisis?”  ran  during  an  instance  of strife named after this period of time, during which James Callaghan’s government instituted pay caps and lost an election to the Conservative Party under Margaret Thatcher. For ten points, what period “of discontent” names a blizzard-filled season in 1979?	ANSWER: winter(acceptWinterQueen; acceptWinterof Discontent)
This man won a mayoral race on the ticket of the Family Party, which began his lifelong feud with the leader of the rival Amalgamators, James Buchanan. This man cast a tie breaking vote to pass the Walker Tariff, effectively destroying his reputation in his home state of Pennsylvania, though he was popular as vice president for supporting the annexation of Texas. For ten points, name this politician who was James Polk’s running mate and who probably is not the namesake of a Texas city founded in the 1840s.	ANSWER: George M. Dallas
A  girl  from  this  country  named  Malalai[ma-la-LIE]  became  a  flag-bearer  and  inspired  her  side  to victory in the Battle of Maiwand against a British/Indian force. An invasion of this country ended with only the surgeon William Brydon returning across the Hindu Kush range. This country was ruled by the Durrani Dynasty until 1826, and then was the site of three British invasions as part of the “Great Game.” For ten points, name this nation where the British were forced to make an 1842 retreat from Kabul.	ANSWER: Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
Some of Jean Sibelius’s final works were written for this institution, including an opus 113 suite and an arrangement ofFinlandiawith new lyrics. Three basset horns are included in the score for a piece of “funeral  music”  written  for  this  organization.  A  member  of  this  organization,  Emmanuel  Schikaneder, wrote  the  libretto  for  an  opera  featuring  the  Queen  of  the  Night  and  the  bird-catcher  Papageno.  The composer ofThe Magic Flute, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, was a member of the Beneficience Lodge of, for ten points, what Enlightenment-inspired fraternal organization?	ANSWER: Free masons (accept anything related toMasoniclodge(s), etc.) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
During  this  war,  William  Inglis  famously  urged  “Die  hard,  57th,  die  hard!”  while  lying  wounded at the Battle of Albuera. One leader’s triumph at the Battle of Vitoria accelerated the end of this war; that leader had built the secret Lines of Torres Vedras as fort chains to defend a territory. The Battle of Salamanca was a major defeat for the forces of Joseph I during this war. A revolt that occurred on May 2, 1808 triggered, for ten points, what war between Napoleon and the Spanish and Portuguese?	ANSWER: PeninsularWar (prompt on Napoleonic War(s) before “Napoleon” is said)
Simon Metcalfe massacred inhabitants of this kingdom in Olowalu before his assistants John Young and Isaac Davis went to work for its king. Men and women were forbidden from eating together by this kingdom’skapusystem of taboos. This kingdom’s founder protected citizens during wartime with the Law of the Splintered Paddle. Lorrin Thurston helped write this kingdom’s Bayonet Constitution, and he later overthrew its Queen Liliuokalani. For ten points, name this kingdom that was unified after the conquest of Oahu.	ANSWER: Kingdom of Hawaii
Catherine Green may have fixed design flaws in an invention by this man, but was given no public credit.  Fones  McCarthy  created  an  updated  version  of  an  invention  by  this  man  that  would  handle long-staple resources. Despite no experience and the recent loss of his factory to a fire, this man agreed to make 10,000 muskets for Congress. The boils and lint were separated by a device created by, for ten points, what proponent of interchangeable parts and inventor of the cotton gin?	ANSWER: Eli Whitney
In the eighth of this poem’s nine sections, “The Spinning-Wheel,” a woman becomes angry when her fianc ́ee likens her to Bertha the Beautiful Spinner. A woman in this poem asks “Why don’t you speak for yourself” when a man delivers his best friend’s proposal of marriage to her. This poem imagines a love triangle between John Alden, Priscilla Mullens, and its title character. For ten points, name this Henry Longfellow poem about a romance in Plymouth Colony.	ANSWER: The CourtshipofMilesStandish
This war included the Battle of Norfolk, a tank battle fought the day after the Battle of 73 Easting. The health effects of this conflict were investigated in the Riegle Report, which concluded that soldiers were exposed to chemical weapons. A stretch of road in this conflict was named the “Highway of Death,” as many soldiers were killed trying to retreat to the Euphrates. Norman Schwarzkopf led coalition troops in, for ten points, what early 1990’s war in response to an invasion of Kuwait?	ANSWER: First (Persian) GulfWar (acceptFirstIraqWar; accept OperationDesertStorm; prompt on Operation Desert Shield) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 9
Mary  Birdsall  bought  a  publication  from  this  woman  titledThe Lilyin  which  she  once  wrote “Intemperance  is  the  great  foe  to  [women’s]  peace  and  happiness.”  This  woman  inspired  Mary  Gove Nichols  to  draft  a  document  against  Parisian  styles.  This  woman  promoted  the  “health,  comfort,  and usefulness”  of  Libby  Miller’s  design,  which  was  displayed  at  the  Seneca  Falls  Convention  and  took  the form of a “Turkish Dress.” An 1851 “craze” was sparked by, for ten points, what suffragette whose name was quickly attached to a style of divided, pant-like dress?	ANSWER: Amelia Bloomer
In  the  1970’s,  a  Chinese  scientist  introduced  a  new  recommended  treatment  for  this  disease  after reading  a  traditional  Chinese  medicine  source  written  in  340  AD.  Tu  Youyou  was  awarded  the  2015 Nobel Prize in medicine for her discovery of a medication used to treat this disease named artemisinin. Individuals with the sickle-cell anemia gene are resistant to, for ten points, what infectious disease that can be avoided by using simple bed nets, thus keeping awayAnophelesmosquitoes?	ANSWER: malaria
In  1955,  this  man  accused  the  US  of  being  a  threat  to  world  peace  in  a  speech  that  promised  to “never forget that the first atom bomb was exploded on Asian soil.” In Geneva in 1954, John Foster Dulles snubbed this man’s handshake. This man’s 1976 death triggered the Tiananmen Incident when the Gang of  Four  removed  mourning  protestors  from  the  square.  The  meeting  between  Mao  Zedong  and  Richard Nixon was arranged by, for ten points, what first Premier of the People’s Republic of China?	ANSWER: ZhouEnlai
This composer changed his surname so that he could serve with the YMCA during World War I. He reused  the  finale  of  his  Second  Suite  for  Military  Band,  “Fantasia  on  the  Dargason,”  in  hisSt. Paul’s Suite. A patriotic hymn by Cecil Spring Rice named “I Vow To Thee, My Country” was set toThaxted, which  was  taken  from  a  suite  by  this  man  with  movements  subtitled  “The  Bringer  of  War”  and  “The Bringer  of  Jollity.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  English  composer  who  depicted  Mars  and  Jupiter  inThe Planets.	ANSWER: Gustav (von) Holst
A subset of this system co-named for Gardner and Salinas allows it to incorporate scientific notation, and the Antoine notation is used to represent numbers in this system. This system was an improvement upon one developed for Napoleon’s army by Charles Barbier; that system was night writing. The Grade 2  variety  is  the  most  commonly  used  English  type  of  this  system,  which  was  developed  by  a  man  who suffered an accident with an awl as a child. For ten points, name this writing system of raised dots used by the blind.	ANSWER: braillewriting Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
This man discussed the two halves of Barack Obama’s private and public goals in his bookObama and The Empire. This leader published the newspaperThe Accuserwhile leading a group simply called The Movement,  after  which  he  planned  an  attack  on  the  Moncada  Barracks.  This  leader  deposed  Fulgencio Batista  in  a  revolution,  during  which  he  worked  alongside  his  brother  Raul.  For  ten  points,  name  this longtime leader of communist Cuba who passed away in 2016.	ANSWER: Fidel Castro
The planners of this event were influenced by an incendiary letter from the doctor Cornelius Rhoads and wished to avenge Pedro Campos’ failed revolution of October 30. Donald Birdzell was struck in the knee  during  this  event,  while  Leslie  Coffelt  was  mortally  wounded.  The  target  of  this  event  had  been temporarily moved to the Blair House thanks to ongoing renovations at the White House. Oscar Collazo and  Griselio  Torresola  carried  out,  for  ten  points,  what  1950  event  in  which  Puerto  Rican  nationalists targeted the sitting president?	ANSWER: attemptedassassinationof  HarryTruman(acceptattackonTrumanor  similar phrasings that don’t imply Truman died; do not accept or prompt on “assassination of Truman,” because he didn’t die)
The  inventor  of  this  weapon  earlier  designed  the  first  double  action  hemp  break.  John  Henry Parker  got  a  nickname  inspired  by  these  weapons,  which  he  used  to  defend  San  Juan  Hill  during  the Spanish-American War. Twelve of these weapons were deployed at the Siege of Petersburg. The ten caliber type of this hand-cranked weapon can fire up to 400 rounds a minute. For ten points, name these rapidly firing  proto-machine  guns  that  were  prominently  used  in  the  Civil  War  and  named  for  their  American inventor.	ANSWER: Gatlingguns (prompt on machine gun before mentioned; do not accept or prompt on semi- or fully-automatic guns)
This man gave his sister Anna in marriage to Vladimir I in exchange for the Chersonesos military base in the Crimea. This man was ambushed at the Gates of Trajan after successfully relieving Sofia from siege. After his greatest success, this man allegedly blinded 99 out of every 100 prisoners he took, a sight that made rival king Samuel die of shock. For ten points, name this winner of the Battle of Kleidion, a Byzantine emperor known as the “Bulgar-slayer.”	ANSWER: BasilII(orBasiltheBulgarSlayerbefore  mentioned;  acceptBasileiosII,Basilthe Porphyrogenitus, orBasiltheYoung; prompt on Basil)
Nearly  1,500  of  these  objects  are  held  at  a  museum  in  Marikina.  After  a  1992  political  upheaval, hundreds of these objects were moved out of the basement of the Malacanang Palace. Upon the opening of  a  museum  for  these  objects,  their  original  owner  remarked  “they  went  into  my  closets  looking  for skeletons,  but  thank  God,  all  they  found  were”  these  objects.  For  ten  points,  name  this  collection  of luxury fashion items amassed by the “Iron Butterfly” of the Philippines, who wore most of the hundreds of pairs of them.	ANSWER: Imelda Marcos’shoes(prompt on partial answers, like “shoes” or “Imelda’s wardrobe”) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 9
Thousands  of  soldiers  fleeing  from  this  country  attempted  to  surrender  to  the  British  after  World War II, but they were refused and subsequently massacred in the Bleiburg Repatriation. In this country, one ethnic group barricaded the village of Berak to disrupt a 1990 election, leading to the Log Revolution. It was led during its independence war by Franjo Tudman, also its first president. This country was led during World War II by the fascist Ustase party, and its ports on the Adriatic include Split and Rijeka. For ten points, name this former Yugoslavian republic, a country with capital Zagreb.	ANSWER: Republic of Croatia
This character claims that “five-card stud taught me a lot about mankind.” His wife sings “This is prophetic!”  after  receiving  a  glass  elephant,  then  interrupts  a  performance  ofThe Red Detachment of Womenin Act II. This operatic character claims “the eyes and ears of history caught every gesture” in “News Has a Kind Of Mystery,” an aria sung just after he stepped off theSpirit of ‘76and was greeted by Chou En-Lai. For ten points, name this title character of a John Adams opera based on his 1972 visit to China.	ANSWER: Richard Nixon(acceptNixoninChina)
Historians have long debated the meaning of this ruler’s last words, “I have made but one mistake.” When  this  ruler  complained  to  his  father  about  a  urine  tax,  his  father  held  up  a  coin  to  him  and  said “money does not stink.” This ruler put down the revolt of Terentius Maximus, who pretended to be the former  emperor  Nero.  A  monument  dedicated  to  this  ruler  shows  soldiers  carrying  off  treasures  like  a pair of trumpets and a golden menorah. For ten points, name this Roman emperor whose namesake arch commemorates his destruction of Jerusalem.	ANSWER: TitusVespasianus Augustus
Squatters attempted to establish the Cimmaron Territory in a portion of this state, and a proposed state  in  its  eastern  half  would  have  had  its  capital  at  Muskogee.  This  state’s  Unassigned  Lands  were opened  up  to  settlement  with  the  Land  Rush  of  1889,  and  the  “Neutral  Strip,”  or  “No  Man’s  Land,” became this state’s western panhandle. The proposed state of Sequoyah would have succeeded the Indian Territory in, for ten points, what Great Plains state just north of Texas?	ANSWER: Oklahoma
One hundred of these objects were initially purchased by William T. Robey, while the other 600 were destroyed.  A  forgery  of  one  of  these  objects  was  found  on  a  Broward  County  absentee  ballot  in  2006. These items have recently sold for nearly a million dollars each, despite their printed price of 24 cents, and  were  made  in  1918  to  commemorate  a  new  air  mail  route.  For  ten  points,  name  these  rare  United States stamps in which the central object was misprinted upside-down.	ANSWER: InvertedJennystamps  (acceptFlyingJennystamp,  accept  any  description  about  an upside-downbiplanestamp, but do not require “upside down” or “inverted” after the final word is read) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 9
This  man’s  attempt  to  get  his  student  Robert  Serber  appointed  to  a  faculty  position  was  blocked by Raymond Birge, who remarked “One Jew in the department is enough.” Haakon Chevalier offered to pass secrets from this man to the Soviets through George Eltenton. With Max Born, this man names a simplification of molecular wave functions that assumes nuclear motion and electron motion is separable. For ten points, name this UC Berkeley physicist known for his leading role in the Manhattan Project.	ANSWER: Julius Robert Oppenheimer
This region was ruled in medieval times by the Bilung family, and the city of Meissen in this region was  renowned  for  its  porcelain.  This  region  was  once  split  between  the  Lauenburg  and  Wittenberg Imperial  Circles,  and  its  Wettin  rulers  split  off  Thuringia  from  this  region.  One  city  in  this  region  was controversially  firebombed  by  Allied  forces  during  WWII.  Dresden  is  in,  for  ten  points,  what  German region whose capital is Leipzig?	ANSWER:Saxony
Support  for  this  initiative  overwhelmingly  increased  after  an  attack  on  Camp  Holloway.  Operation Flaming  Dart  was  an  early  prototype  of  this  initiative.  Wild  Weasels  helped  support  this  initiative that  was  replicated  in  neighboring  countries  under  Operations  Barrell  Roll  and  Menu.  Unlike  the  later Operation Linebacker, this initiative did not use B-52 Stratofortresses. MiGs opposed this initiative, which sought to destroy the Ho Chi Minh trail. For ten points, name this airborne carpet-bombing campaign carried out by the U.S. against North Vietnam.	ANSWER:  Operation RollingThunder(prompt  on  the  U.S.  bombing  campaign  against  the  Ho  Chi Minh Trail before mentioned)
This man wrote one story about the impact of war upon Carter Druses’ family in his “A Horseman in the Sky.” This author described the death of Jerome Searing in “One of the Missing,” and he also wrote a story about a young boy caught up in the battle of Chickamauga. Another story by this author describes the attempted sabotage of Peyton Farquhar before he is hung from title structure. For ten points, name this American author of “An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge” who disappeared in 1914 on a trip to see the Mexican Revolution.	ANSWER: Ambrose Bierce
One  leader  of  this  modern-day  nation  signed  the  Internal  Settlement  with  Abel  Muzorewa.  This modern day nation was the center of a conflict that was ended with the Lancaster House Agreement. The Bush War was fought in this nation, where Ian Smith declared separation from Britain with his Universal Declaration of Independence. Smith’s power in this nation was weakened by the ZAPU and ZANU, which were respectively led by leaders Joshua Nkomo and Robert Mugabe. For ten points, name this country once known as Rhodesia.	ANSWER:Zimbabwe Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 9
A   group   of   New   World   settlers   who   belonged   to   this  group   traded  with   the Timucuans  [[tim-OO-kyoo-uns]]  and  were  led  by  Jean  Ribault  [[ree-BOH]].  A  settlement established  by  this  group  under  Rene  Goulaine  de Laudonniere  [[goo-LEHN  duh  loh-doh- NYEHR]] was attacked by Spanish troops under Pedro Menendez de Aviles. That settlement built  by  these  was  Fort  Caroline  and  was  built  near  modern-day  Jacksonville,  Florida. Participants   in   an   exodus   to   the   Americas,   for   ten   points,   who   were   these   French Protestants?	ANSWER: Huguenots (accept French Protestants before mentioned; prompt on French or Protestants alone)
With Pierce Butler, a delegate from this family proposed that fugitive slaves should be  "delivered  up  like  criminals"  in  introducing  the  Fugitive  Slave  Clause.  A  man  from  this family negotiated the Treaty of San Lorenzo along with Manuel de Godoy in establishing the U.S.  boundary  with  Spanish  Florida.  A  man  from  this  family  was  the  Federalist  Party candidate in 1804 and 1808, after which he served as president-general of the Society of the Cincinnati.  For  ten  points,  name  this  South  Carolina  family  which  included  Charles  and Charles Cotesworth.	ANSWER: Pinckney (accept Charles Pinckney; accept Charles Cotesworth Pinckney)
During the 30 years he spent in Cochabamba, this advisor may have assisted in the Cocaine   Coup.   This   man   was   hired   to   assist   the   Bolivian   government   deal   with   its opponents.  This  man  oversaw  the  Rue  Sainte-Catherine  Roundup,  which  resulted  in  a number of his targets being sent to the Drancy internment camp. The resistance leader Jean Moulin [[moo-LAHN]] was killed by this man, who was the subject of a documentary titled Hotel Terminus.  For  ten  points,  name  this  member  of  the  Gestapo  whose actions  in  France led to his nickname, the “Butcher of Lyon.” [[lee-OHN]]	ANSWER: Nikolaus “Klaus” Barbie (prompt on the "Butcher of Lyon" before mentioned)
Simon  Kamonyai  switched  his  armor  for  this  man's  distinct  armor  set  prior  to  the Battle  of  Hermannstadt,  leading  to  Kamonyai's  death  after  he  was  mistaken  for  this  man. From  the  Taborites,  this  military  leader  adopted  the  "Wagon  Fort"  tactic  he  learned  while serving  Holy  Roman  Emperor  Sigismund  in  Prague.  With  Ladislaus  III  of  Poland,  this general undertook the Varna Crusade of the 1440s, which failed to halt Ottoman expansion in  the  Balkans. The father  of  Mattias Corvinus  was,  for  ten  points,  what  Hungarian  general and regent of the 15th century?	ANSWER: John Hunyadi (or Hunyadi Janos; or Sibinjanin Janko; or Ioan de Hunedoara)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 11
Edward Trumbull designed a mural on the ceiling of this building’s interior that celebrates “human endeavor.” Another building’s designer, John J. Raskob, suspected that a spire  might  have  been hidden  to  provide  this  building  with extra  height. In  1961, an  effort was  made  to  polish  the  steel  portions  of  this  building,  including  the  ornamental,  Gothic- inspired gargoyles on its exterior. For ten points, name this building, briefly the tallest in the world, an Art Deco skyscraper named for a car manufacturer.	ANSWER: Chrysler Building
The  Buddhist  state  of  Ma-i-may  have  either  been  based  on  this  island's  city  of  Bay, or on a neighboring island to the southwest. In the early twentieth century, the U.S. military established  bases  near  Angeles  City  and  Subic  Bay  on  this  island.  The  USS Ommaney Bay sunk during a battle named for this island. Invaded by the Imperial Japanese Army in 1942, approximately 75,000 troops were forced to make a 65-mile march to prison camps on this island that same year. The Bataan Death March and the Battle of Manila occurred on, for ten points, what largest island in the Philippines?	ANSWER: Luzon (accept Battle of Luzon; prompt on the "Philippines" before mentioned)
This senator’s opposition to the  "Build  Back  Better"  Act  led  to  a  confrontation  in  a bathroom with activists from the group, Living United for Change. During a tight senatorial race,  opponent  Martha  McSally  claimed  this  politician  said  it  was  "OK  to  commit  treason" after she supported Afghani-Americans joining the Taliban. This woman brought a piece of cake to the Senate chamber to accompany her "down" vote of Bernie Sanders's proposal to raise  the  federal  minimum  wage  to  fifteen  dollars.  For  ten  points,  name  this  first  openly bisexual representative in Congress, a politician from Arizona.	ANSWER: Kyrsten Sinema (or Kyrsten Lee Sinema)
A  novel  focusing  on  a  character  who  works  in  this  profession  prompted  James Douglas to claim that he would rather give “prussic acid” to a child then have them read it. Radclyffe Hall wrote that work centered on a unit in this profession which was a subject of an  obscenity  trial  and  was  titled The  Well  of  Loneliness. A novel focusing on a “tenente” [[teh-NEHN-teh]]  who  serves  in  this  profession  features a  controversial  depiction  of  the Battle of Caporetto. That novel focuses on Frederic Henry’s experiences in this profession during World War One. For ten points, name these medical transportation workers.	ANSWER: Ambulance Drivers (accept equivalents; prompt on “medical workers” before "medical"; do not accept or prompt on “doctors” or “nurses”)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 11
Following  this  war,  the  hill  people  known  as  the  Atavika  remained  unconquered despite the region's annexation. During this war, one ruler resigned to using the principle of "peaceful  conquest"  known  as Dharmavijaya,  to  incorporate  conquered  people  into  his empire.  Following  this  war,  a  son  of  Chandragupta  committed  himself  to ahimsa,  or  non- violence,  for  the  remainder  of  his  life  according  to  Rock  Edict  number  13.  Ashoka's conversion  to  Buddhism  followed  the  brutality  of,  for  ten  points,  what  war  named  for  a Southeast Indian kingdom?	ANSWER: Kalinga War
This man allegedly bullied Philip the Handsome of Burgundy into a trade agreement so favorable to his country it was dubbed the "Evil Agreement" by the Dutch. Francis Lovell and Humphrey Stafford led a revolt against this monarch, but they were stopped due to the intervention  of  the  knight  John  Savage.  This  man  ruled  through  a  group  of  counselors  and judges known as the Star Chamber. After a consequential battle, this man married Elizabeth of York to cement his control over England. The victor of the Battle of Bosworth Field was, for ten points, what first Tudor king of England?	ANSWER: Henry VII (prompt on "Henry Tudor")   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 11
An editor who spoke for this group opined that one president was "Fungus from the corrupt  womb  of  bigotry  and  fanaticism."  Soldiers  clashed  with  this  group  in  the  1864 Charleston  Riot  in  Illinois.  George  E.  Pugh  was  an Ohio  senator  from  this  group,  as  was Congressman Alexander Long. Order Number 38 was used to punish members of this group including  Lambdin  Milligan  and  Clement  Vallandigham,  both  part  of  the  Knights  of  the Golden Circle. For ten points, name this group of "Peace Democrats" who opposed the Civil War.	ANSWER: Copperheads (accept Peace Democrats before mentioned)
A member of this organization named Trifko Grabež [[GRAH-besh]] was spared the death  penalty  because  of  his  age.  This  organization,  referred  to as  "Unification  or  Death," was established by Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijević [[drah-GOO-tin dee-mee-tree-YEH-vitch]], also known as Apis [[AH-peess]], who was executed on charges of treason in 1917. In 1903, this  organization's  founder  carried  out  the  May  Coup,  which  culminated  in  the  deaths  of King   Alexander   and   Queen   Draga   of   Serbia.   For   ten   points,   name   this   organization responsible for planning the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand.	ANSWER: The Black Hand (accept Crna ruka; accept Unification or Death before mentioned)
In the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, this island was referred to as “of the Dioscuri.” After  the  Battle  of  Barawa,  Tristão  da  Cunha  [[KOON-yah]]  re-grouped  his  forces  on  this island,  where  the  Mahra  sultans  ruled.  Traders  passed  through  the  Guardafui  Channel  en route to this island, which is home to a tree named for its resemblance to dragon’s blood. The  British  ended  their  attempts  to  acquire  this  island  following  the  capture  of  nearby Aden. For ten points, name this Yemeni island off the Arabian Peninsula.	ANSWER: Socotra (or Suquṭrā)
This  author  examined  Robert  Foster’s  path  to  becoming  a  physician  and  Ida Gladney’s departure from a life of sharecropping in a 2010 book. In a 2020 book, this author lists “divine will” and “endogamy” as two of the eight pillars of the titular concept. This one- time editor-in-chief of the Howard University newspaper studied the Great Migration in her book The  Warmth of  Other  Suns.  Social  stratification  in  America  is  compared  to  the  caste system   in   a   book   by,   for   ten   points,   what   Pulitzer   Prize-winning   African-American journalist?	ANSWER: Isabel Wilkerson  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 2
Many stories from this tribe’s oral tradition were preserved by its member John Joseph Mathews. Mollie Kyle and her family were among the members of this tribe affected in a campaign carried out by William Hale, who was sentenced to life in prison for a series of crimes against them. David Grann’s book Killers  of  the  Flower  Moon examines  the  violent attempts  to  profit  from  the  oil  deposits belonging  to  this  tribe.  For  ten  points,  name  this Great Plains tribe which shares its name with an Oklahoma county.	ANSWER: Osage Nation (accept Ni-u-kon-ska; prompt on “People of the Muddy Waters”)
An incident that inspired this song led Adrian Perkins to offer its singer an apology in  2019.  René  Hall  arranged  this  song,  which  appears  on  the  album Ain’t That Good News. The singer of this work claimed to have been inspired by “Blowin’ in the Wind” and wrote this  song  after  an  incident  in  which  he  was  refused  a  room  at  a  motel  in  Shreveport, Louisiana. The refrain, “It's been a long time comin', but I know” appears in this 1964 song which  Jennifer  Hudson  sang  at  the  2020  Democratic  convention.  For  ten  points,  name  this Civil Rights-era song written by Sam Cooke.	ANSWER: "A Change is Gonna Come"
This man was killed by the daughter of Cocalus [[koh-KAH-luhs]] when she poured boiling water over him, after which this man became a judge of the dead. While ruling from Knossos, this man is said to have received direct instruction from his father, Zeus, on what laws  to  enforce  against  his  people.  Arthur  Evans  took  this  man's  name  for  a  civilization which used the Linear A writing system. Every nine years, this man sent fourteen Athenian boys  and girls  to  his labyrinth  to  be  eaten  by  a  bull-headed man.  For  ten  points,  name  this ancient king of Crete.	ANSWER: King Minos (prompt on "Minoan"; prompt on "Minotaur")
One  leader  of  this  dynasty  was  killed  at  a  battle  in  which  his  opponents  built  a thorned zariba fence   around   the   city   of   Gallabat.   Though   initially   establishing   "tent governments," this dynasty founded a capital at the city of Gondar. Yekuno Amlak, like other rulers of this dynasty, was given the title “Lion of Judah.” Claiming descent from the Queen of  Sheba,  this  dynasty  was  led  by  a  ruler  worshipped  by  the  Rastafari  movement.  Haile Selassie [[HAI-luh seh-LAH-see]] ruled, for ten points, what Ethiopian dynasty named for a biblical king?	ANSWER: Solomonic Dynasty (accept House of Solomon)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 2
Historian Gwynne Dyer compared this battle to a "fully loaded 747 crashing...every 5  minutes  for  8  hours."  Pyotr  Bagration  [[pee-OH-ter  bah-GRAY-tee-OHN]]  helped  set  up lunettes  and  redans  at  this  battle.  Fleches  were  set  up  by  Barclay  de  Tolly  at  the  Kolocha [[koh-LOH-chah]]  stream  in  this  battle,  which  included  a  charge  on  the  Raevsky  Redoubt. Mikhail  Kutuzov  replaced  a  commander  for  Tsar  Alexander  I  at  this  battle.  For  ten  points, name this 1812 pyrrhic victory for Napoleon Bonaparte, after which he occupied Moscow.	ANSWER: Battle of Borodino
This  man  travelled  with  John  Clarke  to  England  in  an  attempt  to  get  William Coddington's commission  revoked.  This man  wrote A Key into the Language of America,  the first-published  English-language  study  of  Native  American languages.  After  writing  a  tract criticizing King James for stealing land from the Narragansett, this man moved to Salem and served  as  an  assistant  to  Samuel  Skelton.  Providence  Plantations  was  founded  by,  for  ten points,  what  man  who,  after  being  expelled from  the  Massachusetts  Bay  Colony,  founded Rhode Island?	ANSWER: Roger Williams   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 2
This  man  supervised  the  removal  of  the  Cherokee  from  the  southeastern  U.S.  before  allowing John  Ross  to  lead  the  relocation.  This  man  ordered  the  execution  of  the  Saint  Patrick’s  Battalion  for desertion  and  treason.  Following  victories  at  Veracruz,  Cerro  Gordo,  and  Contreras  during  a  successful Mexican-American War campaign, this man ran for president as a Whig in 1852, losing to Franklin Pierce. For ten points, name this American general nicknamed “Old Fuss and Feathers.”	ANSWER: WinfieldScott
Description acceptable. The Carlsbad Decree was enacted specifically to suppress calls for this event. One war started during this event featured the decisive Battle of Koniggratz and resulted in the annexation of Schleswig-Holstein. The Seven Weeks’ War was fought during this event, which France recognized after Paris was captured by Prussia. For ten points, name this event, which was achieved through “blood and iron” and orchestrated by Otto von Bismarck.	ANSWER:UnificationofGermany(accept equivalents)
By brandishing one of these objects, Blanca Canales violated a 1948 Gag Law during the 1950 Jayuya Uprising.  An  early  version  of  this  object  was  designed  by  Ramon  Betances  for  the  Lares  rebellion.  For three weeks in January, 2019, one of these objects was waved by Lin-Manuel Miranda after performances of Hamilton which helped to raise funds after Hurricane Maria. For ten points, name this patriotic object that flies over San Juan in an unincorporated territory of the U.S.	ANSWER:FlagofPuerto Rico
The definitive history of this conflict is considered to be A Savage War of Peace by Alistair Horne. A  national  capital’s  library  was  burned  to  the  ground  after  a  massacre  in  Oran  during  this  conflict. This  conflict  saw  several  bombings  from  the  OAS,  which  opposed  negotiations  with  Ahmed  Ben  Bella. Thousands of pied-noirs fled after this conflict, which ended with the signing of the Evian Accords. For ten points, name this conflict, after which a French colony gained independence.	ANSWER:Algerian   Warof  Independence  (acceptAlgerian   Revolutionor  TheWar   of   1 November; do not accept or prompt on “Algerian Civil War”)
A  ruler  of  this  empire  who  built  102  hospitals  was  said  to  have  “suffered  from  the  illnesses  of  his subjects more than from his own.” Water sources in this empire included artificial barays and the Tonle Sap.  This  empire  succeeded  the  Kingdom  of  Chenla  and  was  founded  by  Jayavarman  II.  This  empire built a temple meant to symbolize Mount Meru that served both Hindu and Buddhist traditions. For ten points, name this empire that built Angkor Wat in what is now Cambodia.	ANSWER:KhmerEmpire (acceptAngkorEmpire before mentioned, acceptKambujadesa) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 10
This organization was led by the author of Where White Men Fear to Tread, Russell Means, during the  seizing  of  the  Mayflower  II.  Leonard  Peltier,  a  member  of  this  organization,  was  accused  of  killing FBI agents Jack Coler and Ronald Williams at Pine Ridge. Members of this organization took over the Bureau of Indian Affairs building in the culmination of the Trail of Broken Treaties. For ten points, name this Native American interest group that occupied Wounded Knee in 1973.	ANSWER:American Indian Movement(acceptAIM)
A battle for this city led to the use of damaged Polish swords in coronation ceremonies after Boleslaw the  Brave  chipped  his  blade  in  this  city.  This  city  was  governed  by  the  “Pravda”  or  “Justice”  code  of Yaroslav  the  Wise,  under  which  it  reached  its  height.  The  Rurik  dynasty  ruled  a  kingdom  centered  on this city. This city was converted to Christianity by one of its Grand Princes, Vladimir the Great. For ten points, name this capital of the first East Slavic state, the “land of the Rus.”	ANSWER:Kiev, Ukraine
Charles Dickens criticized this work as the product of “very feeble amateurs.” Captions in this work are  called  its  namesake  tituli,  which  often  feature  tildas  to  indicate  abbreviations.  Leofwine  and  Gyrth are  shown  as  fallen  knights  in  this  work,  whose  final  remaining  caption  is  the  line  “And  the  English left  fleeing.”  Bishop  Odo  likely  commissioned,  for  ten  points,  what  work  that  illustrates  how  Harold Godwinson lost England to the Norman, William the Conquerer, an 11th century embroidery?	ANSWER:Bayeux Tapestry
This man insinuated that the 1999 Moscow apartment bombings were a false flag attack in his book Blowing  Up  Russia.  This  man’s  wife,  Marina,  launched  an  inquest  into  his  death  that  revealed  it  was likely planned by the FSB on the orders of Vladimir Putin. After this man, who is reputed to have coined the term “mafia state,” allegedly defected to MI6, he was poisoned after drinking from a polonium-infused teapot. For ten points, name this ex-Russian spy who was assassinated in 2006.	ANSWER: AlexanderLitvinenko
A man with this surname was created the first Viscount Brome. That man’s youngest son with this surname, Williiam, was an admiral, known for his command of the Channel Fleet during the Napoleonic Wars. William’s oldest brother with this surname oversaw creation of the “Permanent Settlement” that regulated  revenues  received  from  India  and  also  served  as  military  governor  in  Ireland.  For  ten  points, give the surname of Charles, the British general who surrendered at Yorktown.	ANSWER:Cornwallis Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Round 10
This case was originally filed against H.G. Cochrane who retired soon after. The winner of this case was forced to sit for a second trial during which he was represented by Fred Turner. This case overturned the “special circumstances” requirement written inBetts v. Brady. In this case, Abe Fortas argued on the behalf of a defendant who had broken into a Florida pool hall. The public defender system was expanded as a result of, for ten points, what case that expanded the accused’s right to an attorney to states.	ANSWER: Gideonv.Wainwright(accept either underlined name)
Five  of  these  structures  were  based  on  the  island  of  Kneiphof[neep-hof],  where  Immanuel  Kant  is buried, but two of the five were destroyed during World War II bombing raids. These structures, which spanned the Pregel River, were the subject of a popular thought problem that was solved in 1736 by a clever, early use of graph theory. For ten points, name this set of walkways in a Prussian city, now the Russian city of Kaliningrad, that were famously studied by Leonhard Euler [oiler].	ANSWER:SevenBridgesofK ̈onigsberg(prompt on partial answers; do not accept answers referring to Kaliningrad)
This battle’s loser boasted that “an arm when cut off cannot grow again, but a shorn beard will.” Marco  Bragadin  was  flayed  alive  after  buying  time  for  this  battle’s  winning  side  to  assemble  a  fleet. This battle was prompted by the siege of Famagusta and the loss of one participant’s colony of Cyprus. Miguel Cervantes lost an arm fighting under Don Juan of Austria in this battle, the last great engagement between galleys. For ten points, identify this naval victory for the Holy League over the Ottomans in 1571.	ANSWER: Battle of Lepanto
Peter Malkin’s memoirs about this event inspired a 2018 film starring Ben Kingsley as this event’s subject and also featuring Michael Aronov as Zvi Aharoni. During this event, a team led by Rafi Eitan raided a home on Garibaldi Street. This event, the subject of the filmOperation Finale, resulted in agents of Mossad drugging a man for his flight out of Argentina in May 1960. For ten points, name this event that allowed a Nazi to be put on trial in Israel.	ANSWER: Mossad/Israel’s capture(or synonyms) of AdolfEichmann(accept equivalents; prompt on partial answers; do not accept Eichmann’s trial)
James Martin Eder revolutionized this industry at the “La Manuelita” hacienda with steam power. The Mascate War was fought between Portuguese merchants and landowners of this industry in Pernambuco. John Drax used slave labor to develop this industry in Barbados, which later utilized Benjamin Delessert’s method  of  extracting  this  industry’s  commodity  from  beet  roots.  For  ten  points,  name  this  industry central to the Caribbean colonies, products from which were used to make rum and molasses.	ANSWER: sugarcane industry (prompt on “molasses” industry until mention) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 10
Followers of this man broke into the house of Rebecca Vaughan and killed while she prayed. After being found hiding among the Nottoway by Benjamin Phipps, this man asked “Was Christ not crucified?” The blueish-green appearance of the Sun, possibly caused by an eruption of Mount St. Helens, was interpreted by this man as a message from God to begin one event. Thomas Gray recorded the “confessions” of this man who may have ordered his followers to “kill all the white people.” For ten points, name this slave who led an 1831 rebellion in Southampton County, Virginia.	ANSWER: Nat Turner
During this conflict, one side’s declaration that they were preparing the Samson Option prompted the United States to provide aid in Operation Nickel Grass. This conflict commenced with a surprise attack in Operation Badr on the Bar Lev Line. Henry Kissinger’s shuttle diplomacy helped bring an end to this conflict, the failure to prevent which led Golda Meir to resign. For ten points, name this conflict in which Arab forces surprised Israel on the Day of Atonement.	ANSWER: YomKippurWar
This man’s first term as prime minister ended after Daniel O’Connell allied with Lord Melbourne to block any law this man proposed. This man sparked the Bedchamber Crisis and penned the Tamworth Manifesto,  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  the  Conservative  Party.  This  man  resigned  after  siding  with  the opposition to repeal the Corn Laws in the wake of the Irish Potato Famine. For ten points, identify this British prime minister who founded the London Metropolitan Police Force.	ANSWER: Robert Peel
Steve Bales accepted an award for his role in this mission for saying “Go” when he could have said “Stop”  or  “Wait.”  A  planned  speech  in  case  this  mission  failed  opens  with  “Fate  has  ordained”  that men who went to “explore in peace” will now “rest in peace.” After completing a landing procedure in this mission, its participants radioed Houston to say “The Eagle has landed.” For ten points, name this mission in which Neil Armstrong said “That’s one small step for man” after landing on the moon.	ANSWER: Apollo11
A work by this composer was adapted from the last two tableau of his posthumously publishedPress Celebrations Music. The Biafran national anthem was adapted from a melody by this composer, as was the hymnBe Still, My Soul. This composer of seven symphonies left his final one, in C major, unfinished. One of this composer’s works was censored during his country’s independence movement from Russia at the start of the 20th century. For ten points, name this composer ofFinlandia.	ANSWER: Jean Sibelius Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Round 10
This practice was the subject of a case that cited section 7 of Canada’s Charter,R v. Morgentaler. An essay defending this practice uses the thought experiment of an unconscious violinist who needs a kidney transplant and was written by Judith Thomson. The Mexico City policy blocks federal funding to groups that promote this practice. Sarah Weddington represented an anonymous client seeking to undergo, for ten points, what medical procedure, the focus of the 1973 caseRoe v. Wade?	ANSWER: abortion
Deusdedit is often considered the first non-Italian holder of this position. A holder of this position named Plegmund crowned Edward the Elder king after the death of Alfred the Great. Another holder of this position was the subject of the T.S. Eliot playMurder in the Cathedral. The holder of this position is superior to the overseer of the Diocese of York. Thomas Becket held, for ten points, what position, the highest clerical position in the Church of England?	ANSWER: ArchbishopofCanterbury
This action was ruled to be unconstitutional in a Supreme Court case that resulted from the sale of federal  bonds  without  the  signature  of  a  state  governor.  Joe  Vogler  founded  a  political  party  with  this action as its primary goal.Texas v. Whiteheld this action to be illegal. At the Hartford Convention, many Federalists advocated this action for the region of New England. South Carolina performed this action on December 10, 1860. The Alaskan Independence Party advocated, for ten points, what action in which a state leaves the Union?	ANSWER: secession(accept word forms, likesecede; accept thesecessionof any specific state; prompt on descriptive answers related to leaving the U.S.)
This figure is depicted lying on a bloody bed next to a standing red-haired woman in a painting by Edvard Munch. In another depiction, a knife lies on the ground next to this man, who holds a letter on which  the  name  “Charlotte  Corday”  is  printed.  In  that  painting,  this  eczema-suffering  man  lies  lifeless in a bathtub over which a green fabric is draped. For ten points, name this radical journalist and leader during the French Revolution, whose death was depicted by Jacques-Louis David.	ANSWER: Jean-Paul Marat(accept Death ofMarat)
A member of this profession sued Jackie Onassis Kennedy after Secret Service agents destroyed his property; that man is Ron Galella. A character played by Walter Santesso inLa Dolce Vitainspired the name of this profession, which is referred to as the “puppy squad” in China. In 1997, a Mercedes S280 that was being driven away from members of this group crashed in a tunnel, killing Dodi Fayed and Princess Diana.  A  2013  law  was  passed  to  protect  children  of  celebrities  from  being  harassed  by,  for  ten  points, what notoriously aggressive type of photographer?	ANSWER: paparazzi(acceptpaparazzo;  prompt  on  photographer,  journalist,  or  other  generic  terms before “photographer” is read) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 10
While on trial, this figure was held in contempt of court for exclaiming “God will ruin you and your posterity and this whole state!” This figure claimed that John Wilson “lacked the seal of spirit,” instead preferring the teachings of Cotton Mather. John Clarke, William Coddington, and this figure founded the city of Portsmouth. In 1638, this woman was expelled from the Massachusetts Bay Colony as a result of the  Antinomian  Controversy.  For  ten  points,  name  this  woman  who  joined  Roger  Williams  in  colonial Rhode Island after breaking with Puritans in Boston.	ANSWER: Anne Hutchinson
This  ruler  hired  Balthasar  Gerard  to  assassinate  a  ruler  he  deemed  a  “pest  on  the  whole  of Christianity.” This ruler, whose empire declared bankruptcy five times, became King of Portugal during a succession crisis prompted by the death of King Sebastian at the Battle of Alcacer Quibir. The Duke of Alba established the Council of Troubles on behalf of this ruler to punish rebels in the Netherlands. For ten points, name this husband of Queen Mary of England who launched the Spanish Armada.	ANSWER: PhilipIIof Spain
This politician lamented “generations of men not even thinking about working or learning to value the  culture  of  work”  in  an  interview  about  his  paper  advocating  welfare  cuts,  The  War  on  Poverty:  50 Years Later. This man authored the “Roadmap for America’s Future,” which became the GOP’s “Path to Prosperity” budget. This man, who announced his retirement shortly after facing a challenge from Paul Nehlen,  ascended  to  his  highest  office  after  the  retirement  of  John  Boehner.  For  ten  points,  name  this Speaker of the House from Wisconsin.	ANSWER: PaulRyan
The  location  of  this  battle  was  named  for  a  prominent  tree  whose  name  translates  to  “Flame  of the Forest.” The 39th Regiment under Eyre Coote was able to capture a key hill at this battle after his opponent fled without firing a shot. Three years after this battle, a French force was defeated at the Battle of Wandiwash. Siraj-ud-Daulah was defeated at this 1757 battle by Robert Clive, who intended to avenge the men who died at the Black Hole of Calcutta. For ten points, name this battle of the Seven Years War that gave the British East India Company control of Bengal.	ANSWER: Battle of Plassey
Camp Bettens was created by this organization. After Philip Clarke told Frederick Ryder of a dead cow, this group engaged the Yaqui in Bear Valley, Arizona. At the Battle of Ambos Nogales, this group was  led  by  Frederick  Herman.  Charles  Young  and  Benjamin  Grierson  were  leaders  of  this  group.  Over 100  of  these  people  were  dishonorably  discharged  in  1906  after  evidence  was  planted  against  them  in the Brownsville affair. John Pershing earned his nickname for serving with, for ten points, what African American Army regiments that fought in the Old West?	ANSWER:BuffaloSoldiers(accept10thCavalryRegiment;  accept25thCavalryRegiment  after “100” is read; prompt on descriptions of African American soldiers in the US Army before mentioned) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Round 10
As Acting Solicitor General, Neal Katyal released a 2011 statement accusing one of his predecessors, Charles Fahy, of covering up evidence relevant to this case. Justice Frank Murphy’s dissent in this case, along  with  his  concurrence  inSteele,  marked  the  first  uses  of  the  word  “racism”  in  a  Supreme  Court opinion. The previous case ofHirabayashi v. United Stateswas found to be controlling in Hugo Black’s majority  opinion  in  this  case,  which  defended  Executive  Order  9066  as  a  legitimate  use  of  executive discretion.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1944  Supreme  Court  decision  that  upheld  Japanese  internment camps.	ANSWER: Korematsuv. United States
An axeman who legendarily killed 40 people at this battle was himself killed when a soldier underneath the  bridge  he  stood  on  stabbed  him  through  the  planks.  One  attack  during  this  battle  was  known  as “Orre’s Storm.” This battle, named for a location near the Derwent River, included the deaths of Tostig and  the  Norwegian  king  Harald  Hardrada.  For  ten  points,  name  this  victory  for  the  forces  of  Harold Godwinson which preceded the 1066 Battle of Hastings by five days.	ANSWER: Battle of StamfordBridge
A  king  of  this  dynasty  named  You  disgraced  the  Marquis  of  Shen  after  divorcing  his  daughter  for Bao Si, which led to the sacking of Hao. This dynasty, which was founded in the Wei river valley, won the Battle of Muye against Di Xin [deeshin]. The Eastern version of this dynasty featured the Hundred Schools  of  Thought  during  the  Spring  and  Autumn  Period,  and  this  dynasty  faded  when  the  Warring States were unified into the Qin dynasty. For ten points, name this longest-lasting Chinese dynasty.	ANSWER:Zhoudynasty (accept WesternZhaountil “Wei” is read, then accept Western and/or Eastern Zhao)
A student at this school was expelled when he said a tutor named Whittlesey “had no more grace than a chair.” While under the leadership of Thomas Clapp, this university faced a conflict between the “Old Lights”  and  “New  Lights.”  This  university  is  named  after  a  leader  in  the  British  East  India  Company, but it was known as the Collegiate School while it was located in Saybrook. The Skull and Bones secret society  was  formed  at,  for  ten  points,  what  Ivy  League  university  that,  in  1716,  moved  to  New  Haven, Connecticut?	ANSWER: YaleUniversity
The publication of this work was preceded by a 9-page manuscript titledDe motu corporum in gyrum, which was sent to Edmund Halley. The author of this work added a section containing the line “I contrive no hypotheses” to the end of this work’s second edition, referred to as the General Scholium. This work contains a proof of Kepler’s empirically derived laws of planetary motion. For ten points, name this book that introduced the three laws of motion and the law of universal gravitation, written by Sir Isaac Newton.	ANSWER: (Philosophiae Naturalis) PrincipiaMathematica Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 10
This man instructed his warriors to sing an enemy victory chant to lure out his opponent’s defenses in the final defeat of his rival, Zwide[zwee-day]. This leader instructed his troops to envelop enemies while attacking in a “buffalo horns” formation and introduced the tactic of offensive shield hooking while using a shorter, stabbing spear called the iklwa. Dingane[din-gah-nay] helped assassinate this chieftain in 1828. For ten points, name this early leader of the Zulu kingdom.	ANSWER: ShakaZulu (orShakakaSenzangakhona)
This body’s legislation was stored in the treasury building, called the Aerarium. A common stalling tactic in this body was to continue speaking until nightfall. This body was forbidden from meeting more than a mile from thepomerium. The Catiline Conspiracy was exposed in a meeting of this body, whose actions could be vetoed by tribunes. Its members were appointed by the censors, often after holding offices like aedile and quaestor. For ten points, name this legislative body of Rome.	ANSWER:RomanSenate(prompt on Senate alone until “Rome” is said, then accept Senate)
This  man  depicted  Louis  de  Bourbon  brought  before  William  de  la  Marck  inThe Murder of the Bishop of Liege. An Assyrian king appears disinterested as his concubines are killed in this man’sDeath of Sardanapalus, and he illustrated another slaughter in hisMassacre at Chios. This man’s most famous work  is  set  during  the  July  Revolution  and  depicts  Marianne  at  the  front  of  a  ragtag  army  holding  a musket and tricolor. For ten points, name this French painter ofLiberty Leading the People.	ANSWER: Eugene Delacroix
The location of this project was hotly contested by a board chaired for a time by Gouverneur Morris. A series of letters advocating this project were written under the pseudonym “Hercules” by inmate Jesse Hawley. This project required the dangerous and costly draining of Montezuma Marsh. It was derisively nicknamed “Clinton’s Ditch” after then governor of New York DeWitt Clinton. For ten points, identify this waterway that, after 1821, connected Albany to a namesake great lake bordering Buffalo.	ANSWER: ErieCanal
Description acceptable. A key piece of evidence in this lawsuit was the “Porter Presentation,” which supposedly made Pete Rozelle “physically ill.” Though the plaintiff in this case was awarded victory, the jury only awarded damages of one dollar, which was tripled because the case involved antitrust law. In the aftermath of this case, Donald Trump’s New Jersey Generals and other teams suspended operations. For ten points, name this lawsuit filed by the USFL against its primary competitor, which was found to have created an anti-competitive business environment.	ANSWER: NFLmonopolycase  (acceptUnitedStatesFootballLeaguev.NationalFootball League,  orUSFLv.NFL,  or  descriptions  of  “the  USFL’s  lawsuit,”  before  USFL  is  named;  accept antitrust for monopoly before antitrust is mentioned; prompt on “the NFL’s lawsuit” and similar) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Round 10
One general in this war was so successful at Civetot and Xerigordon that he ignored it to fight the Danishmends.  While  ostensibly  fighting  in  this  war,  Emicho  of  Flonheim  massacred  Jews.  Kilij  Arslan lost the Battle of Dorylaeum during this war, and the counties of Tripoli and Edessa were founded in its wake.  This  conflict  was  originally  intended  to  aid  Alexius  Comnenus,  and  it  began  after  cries  of  “Deus Vult!” at the Council of Clermont. For ten points, name this crusade which resulted in the 1099 capture of Jerusalem.	ANSWER: FirstCrusade(orPrince’sCrusade; acceptPeople’sCrusadeuntil “Emicho” is read; prompt onCrusades)
The  policies  of  this  period  were  supported  by  Ludvik  Svoboda.  To  protest  the  end  of  this  event, Jan Palach committed self-immolation. This event ended with the “Normalization” period under Gustav Husak, and it had begun after the ouster of Antonin Novotny. The initiator of this period, who promulgated an “Action Plan” and “socialism with a human face,” was Alexander Dubcek. Soon after Leonid Brezhnev sent Warsaw Pact troops to quell it, he formulated his namesake Doctrine. For ten points, name this 1968 period of liberalization in Czechoslovakia.	ANSWER: PragueSpring(orPrazskejaroorPrazskajar)
The name of this publication’s founder, Walter Bagehot [BADGE-ut] is used as a pen name for one of its editorial columnists. This publication’s name refers to an archaic name for support of free trade, as it was founded in opposition to the Corn Laws. Henry Kissinger once facetiously said that he no longer needs to think; instead, he just reads this London-based periodical. For ten points, name this weekly news magazine which provides commentary and analysis on current events, business, and politics, as well as a namesake branch of social science.	ANSWER: The Economist
This  ruler  translated  some  of  the  couplets  inThe Knight in the Panther’s Skin,  which  was  the national epic of his home country. A poem about this ruler mentions his “thick fingers” that are bulky and “fat like live-baits” as well as his wide “Ossetian torso.” His secret police ordered the execution of Osip Mandelstam for writing a satirical epigram. Nicholas Rubashov is supposedly unloyal to this man, called Number One, in Arthur Koestler’sDarkness at Noon. For ten points, name this totalitarian dictator of the USSR who died in 1953.	ANSWER: Joseph Stalin(or JosephDzhugashvili) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 10
A painting protesting one form of this activity depicted it in a blue circle near the top; in that work by  James  Ensor,  a  bird  bleeds  on  a  man’s  head.  In  another  work,  two  men  watch  this  activity  while standing  against  a  red  backdrop,  while  a  woman  turning  away  from  this  activity  covers  her  eyes  with gnarled fingers. Instead of watching this activity, two men in front of the artist’s signature, one holding a sheet of paper, look directly at the viewer. For ten points, name this activity performed in Rembrandt’s The Anatomy Lessonby Dr. Nicolaes Tulp.	ANSWER: dissectionorsurgery(acceptvivisection;  accept  The  VileVivisectors;  prompt  on  The AnatomyLessonof Dr. Nicolaes Tulp)
During  this  battle,  the  elderly  civilian  Judith  Henry  was  targeted  by  artillery,  and  Edward  Porter Alexander  utilized  “wig-wag  signalling”  to  tell  Nathaniel  “Shanks”  Evans  of  an  impending  flank.  This battle began after westward movement from Centreville resulted in skirmishing at Matthews Hill, and was decided  when  Joseph  Johnston’s  reinforcements  arrived  via  railcars.  Picnickers  were  horrified  by  Irwin McDowell’s defeat at, for ten points, what early victory for P.G.T. Beauregard, the first major battle of the Civil War?	ANSWER: FirstBattle ofBullRun(orFirstManassas)
Robert LaFollete’s suspicions regarding this event intensified after his Senate office room was raided. Following this event, Congress was granted the power to compel testimony by the Supreme Court’s ruling inMcGrain v. Daughterty.  The  perpetrators  of  this  event  took  advantage  of  the  Mineral  Leasing  Act. Edward Doheny acquired Elk Hills in this event, which led to the downfalls of Henry Sinclair and Albert Fall. Bribes for favorable leases of federal land were given out in, for ten points, what scandal that rocked the administration of Warren G. Harding?	ANSWER: TeapotDomeScandal
The Crescentii helped one person with this name gain power upon the ascension of Otto II. Another person  with  this  name  issuedEtsi du statuupon  receiving  an  embargo  for  writingClericos Laicos.  An Anglo-Saxon who took this name felled Donar’s Oak, and a pope of this name declared that the church wielded two swords inUnam Sanctum. For ten points, give this name for a pope who fought with Philip IV and a saint who converted many in early 8th century Frisia and Germany.	ANSWER: Boniface(acceptFrancountil “Etsi” is read)
During this event, a Nightstawker helicopter entered a vortex ring state and damaged its tail rotor. Some participants in this event claimed they used “cakebread” or “crankshaft” as a codeword instead of the  controversial  “Geronimo.”  Contradictory  accounts  have  emerged  about  whether  or  not  the  central figure in this event used women as human shields in his compound in Abbottabad. For ten points, name this May 2011 operation by Seal Team 6, codenamed Neptune Spear, in which the founder of Al-Qaeda was killed.	ANSWER: the death(orkilling, etc.) of OsamabinLaden(accept equivalents) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 10
In 1892, Isaac Bruce was falsely convicted of rape in this state but saved from hanging by governor James  Hogg.  After  the  murder  of  Lucy  Fryer  in  this  state,  the  accused  supposedly  pled  guilty  during a one-hour-long trial attended by 10,000 people; after four minutes of jury deliberation, the lynch mob castrated, burned, and desecrated of the body of Jesse Washington, an act later labeled a “Horror.” The aforementioned Bruce case stemmed from an incident during the Juneteenth holiday, which commemorates this state’s 1865 abolishment of slavery. For ten points, name this state, the site of the 1916 Waco Horror.	ANSWER: Texas
During  a  conflict  in  this  region,  the  Grey  Wolves  deployed  one  thousand  militia under the guidance of Isgandar Hamidov. Mediation by Medetkhan Sheremkulov [[meh-det- KAHN  sheh-rem-KOO-lof]]  successfully  ended  the  first  conflict  named  for  this  region  with the  Bishkek  Protocol.  This  region's de  facto capital,  Stepanakert  [[step-AH-nah-kehrt]], experienced   ethnic   cleansing   of   its   Muslim   minority,   leading   to   intervention   by   the government  in  Baku.  Armenia  and  Azerbaijan  fought  multiple  wars  over,  for  ten  points, what region in the South Caucasus, provisionally controlled by the Republic of Artsakh?	ANSWER: Nagorno-Karabakh (accept Republic of Artsakh before mentioned; accept Nagorno-Karabakh War)
This  man  was  killed  in  action  after  spearheading  an  attack  on  a blockhouse  during which he rallied troops with the cry “Come on, my good soldiers, your General calls upon you.” With the help of David Wooster, this man besieged Fort St. John, which was then under the command of Guy Carleton. A poem notes how this man died on a battlefield “ting'd with blood that gush'd from Moncalm's veins” during a campaign in which his forces were joined with those of Benedict Arnold. For ten points, name this Continental Army general who led the 1775 invasion of Quebec.	ANSWER: Richard Montgomery (accept "Elegy on the death of Gen. Montgomery")
An inscription found at Sant' Agata dei Goti suggests that this man built a temple to Serapis on the Quirinal Hill. The dediticii [[ded-ee-tee-KEE-ee]] who surrendered in combat were  an  exception  to  this  man’s  edict  greatly  extending  Roman  citizenship.  A  set  of palaestras were found in a building named for this man containing a frigidarium. Following the Praetorian Guard’s assassination of his brother, Geta, this man became the sole ruler of Rome  before  himself  being  killed  in  219.  For  ten  points,  name  this  eldest  son  of  Septimius Severus and namesake of a large complex of Roman baths.	ANSWER: Caracalla (or Marcus Aurelius Antoninus "Caracalla"; accept Baths of Caracalla; or Terme di Caracalla)
On  March  17,  1992,  the  Israeli  embassy in  this country  was  bombed  by  the  Islamic Jihad  Organization.  That  bombing  occurred  two  years  prior  to  a  bombing  in  this  country's capital  of  a  Jewish  Community  Center  called  AMIA.  This  country's  president,  Carlos  Saul Menem,  ordered  the  release  of  files  relating  to  this  country's  role  in  protecting  Nazi  war criminals,  including  Adolf  Eichmann.  For  ten  points,  name  this  South  American  country, where Jewish journalist Jacobo Timerman wrote about the Dirty War.	ANSWER: Argentina (accept Argentine Republic; accept Republica Argentina)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 12
A  conflict  over  the  imperial  succession  in  this  period  gave  rise  to  the  Hogen Rebellion.   Retired   emperors   withdrew   to   monasteries   but   still   held   influence   over government  during  this  period's  "Cloistered  Rule,  and  beginning  in  this  period,  noble women  began  wearing  a  particular  twelve-layered  robe.  The  Fujiwara  clan  dominated politics  during  this  period,  in  which  a  work  known  as The  Pillow  Book was  written.  The Taira [[tah-EE-rah]] clan was defeated at the end of this period during the Genpei War. For ten points, name this period of cultural flourishing in classical Japan.	ANSWER: Heian Period (accept Heian jidai; prompt on "Twelfth Century" or "1100s" before "robe" is mentioned)
In  1977,  one  of  these  places  was  created  after  Steve  Rubell  and  Ian  Schrager converted a theatre. In 1986, one of these places in West Germany, known as La Belle, was bombed,  prompting  Ronald  Reagan  to  order  Operation  El  Dorado  Canyon  against  Libya. Studio  54  was  a  prominent  example  of  these  locations,  another  of  which  was  the  site  of Omar Mateen’s mass shooting in Florida. For ten points, name these locations which include Pulse in Orlando.	ANSWER: Nightclubs (accept Music Club; accept Discotheque; accept Disco Club; accept Dance Club; accept Gay Bars; prompt on "Club")
An attempt to establish quotas to raise 140,000 troops in this country was part of a policy  called  the  Union  of  Arms.  The  county  of  Rousillon  [[roo-see-YOHN]]  was  in  the Northeastern  March  of  this  country  in  the  late-15th  century.  Italian  Ambrogio  Spinola conquered  Breda  while  leading  the  army  of  this country,  whose forces  were  devastated  by the French at Rocroi [[roh-KWAH]], ending the dominance of this country's Tercios. For ten points,  name  this  Great  Power  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  once  ruled  by Philip II.	ANSWER: Kingdom of Spain (accept Reino de España)
Though not by Karl Marx, this work claims that humanity “does not passively submit to the presence of nature” in its section “The Point of View of Historical Materialism." Three years  prior  to  this  work,  its  author  eschewed  an  ethical  framework  in  a  book  titled The Ethics of Ambiguity. Divisions between “the subject” and “the Other” are drawn in this work, which argues that “one is not born but becomes” a member of the title group. Written by the lover  of  Jean-Paul  Sartre,  for  ten  points,  what  is  this  feminist  book  by  Simone  de  Beauvoir [[boh-VWAH]]?	ANSWER: The Second Sex (accept Le Deuxième Sexe)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 12
This  composer  wrote  the  music  for The  Plow  That  Broke  the  Plains for  the  U.S. government's  Resettlement  Administration.  This  rival  of  Aaron  Copland  chronicled  the  life of Susan B. Anthony and the women's suffrage movement in his opera The Mother of Us All. This music critic  for  the New York Herald Tribune drew  from  the  lives  of  Ignatius  of  Loyola and Teresa of Avila for an operatic collaboration with Gertrude Stein. For ten points, name this American composer who wrote Four Saints in Three Acts.	ANSWER: Virgil Thomson
After this occurrence, the central figure’s bodyguards, known as the “skullcrushers,” assassinated this event's perpetrator. Rexford Tugwell claimed that this event resulted in “a beneficent peace [throughout] the land.” The defeat of Benjamin Pavy may have contributed to  this  event,  which  was  carried  out  by  a  physician  from  Baton  Rouge  named  Carl  Weiss. This  event  brought  about  the  end  of  the  Share  Our  Wealth  program,  led  by  its  central Louisiana   politician.   For   ten   points,   name   this   event in   which   a   populist   governor nicknamed “The Kingfish” was killed.	ANSWER: Assassination of Huey (Pierce) Long Jr. (prompt on “assassination of the Kingfish” before mentioned; prompt on partial answers; accept equivalents in place of "assassination" such as “killing” or “murder”)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 12
A  1971  Supreme  Court  case  named  for  opposing  parties  with  this  surname  ruled against  differential  treatment  based  on  sex.  The  U.S.  representative  for  New  York's  23rd congressional district who replaced Eric Massa in 2010 has this surname. A Speaker of the House   with   this   surname   stopped   the   "disappearing   quorum"   tactic   by   counting   all members  as  present  even  if  they  ignored  the  roll  call.  For  ten  points,  give  this  surname  of U.S. politician Thomas Brackett, sometimes referred to as "Czar."	ANSWER: Reed (accept Reed v. Reed; accept Tom Reed; accept Thomas Brackett Reed)
Charles  Colson  once  suggested  that  this  organization  should  be  attacked  in  a firebombing. This organization’s first president, Harry Moulton, organized  a  movement against FDR’s National Recovery Act. This organization was founded by the merger of three organizations including its namesake’s graduate school, which was linked to Washington University  of  St.  Louis.  Haim  Saban  previously  was  the  namesake of  this  organization's Center of Middle Eastern Policy. For ten points, name this think tank, seen as the American Enterprise Institute's left-leaning counterpart.	ANSWER: The Brookings Institution
This  man  translated  the  First  Helvetic  Confession  into English  and  served  as  a bodyguard in defense of George Wisehart. This man considered kneeling during communion idolatrous,  leading  to  the  Black  Rubric.  French  forces  under  Leone  Strozzi  [[leh-OH-neh STROH-tsee]] captured this man and turned him into a galley slave. This man wrote the five- volume  tome The History of the Reformation in Scotland.  This  man  wrote  a  "first  blast  of  a trumpet"  criticizing  the  unnatural  "monstrous  regiment  of  women,"  targeting  Mary  I  of England. For ten points, name this Scottish reformer, the founder of Presbyterianism.	ANSWER: John Knox
This man claimed that like that of the “white man," the heart of a slave “swells with love... [and] aches with sorrow” in a legal brief written during the Creole case.  This  man succeeded Leroy Walker in one post and used his experience as a lawyer in New Orleans to serve  as  Attorney  General  under  Jefferson  Davis.  Strategies  for  dealing  with  the  Union blockade were brainstormed by this man, who was named after a relative who oversaw his brit milah ceremony. For ten points, name this Confederate Secretary of State, a politician of Jewish descent.	ANSWER: Judah P(hilip) Benjamin  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 3
During a conflict with police, one leader of this country said, “If you want to kill the president,  here  he  is,  kill him  if  you  have  the  guts."  This  country  faced  2019  anti-austerity demonstrations  at  Carondelet  [[kah-ROHN-deh-let]]  Palace  and  a  raid  on  Pichincha  [[pee- CHEEN-chah]] Universal. Julian Assange was granted asylum in an embassy of this country, which  elected the  Guillermo  Lasso  as  president  in  2021.  For  ten  points,  name  this  South American country which faced 2015 inheritance tax protests against the Alianza País [[pah- YEES]].	ANSWER: Republic of Ecuador (accept República del Ecuador)
A  royal  huntsman  was the  dedicatee  of  a  painting  by  this  artist  which  depicts  the competition  between  Arachne  [[ah-RAHK-nee]]  and  Athena.  A  Flemish  artist's  painting  of the Hungarian king, Ferdinand IV, may have inspired one of this artist’s paintings of a “humane captain.” A checkered  flag  and  lances  feature  in  that  work  by  this  artist  paying homage  to  Ambrogio  [[ahm-BROH-zhoh]]  Spinola.  A  painting  featuring  an Infanta,  a  dog, and  two  people  with  dwarfism  was  completed  by  this  man  for  Philip  IV.  For  ten  points, name this artist of The Surrender of Breda and Las Meninas.	ANSWER: Diego Velázquez
This battle included Operation Scotland II [[TWO]], and it ended in the termination of the McNamara Line. A combined force lifted the siege at this battle via Operation Pegasus. Operation   Niagara   was   launched   during   this   battle,   at   which   William   Westmoreland planned  to  use  nuclear  weapons.  This  battle  followed  the  Hill  Fights  and  the  Battle  of  Dak To  [[DAHK  TOH]].  For  ten  points,  name  this  1968  Vietnam  War  battle  in  which  a  besieged American  force  avoided  losing  to  the  North  Vietnamese  in  Quảng  Trị [[KWAHNG  TREE]] Province.	ANSWER: Battle of Khe Sanh [[KEH-SAHN]]
One ruler with this first name captured a castle at Mold after a prince’s defeat at the hands of the Earl of Essex. A skirmish at Cilmeri [[kil-MEH-dee]] led to the death of another man  with  this  first  name,  who  was  married  to  Eleanor  Montfort.  That  man  with  this  first name  was  forced  to  accept  limits  on  his  domain  in  the  Treaty  of  Aberconwy,  which stabilized his territory in Gwynedd [[GWIN-eth]]. Though not Scottish, Edward Longshanks carried out a campaign against a ruler of this name often known “the Last” or ap Gruffydd [[GRIF-ith]]. For ten points, give this name shared by several Welsh rulers.	ANSWER: Llywelyn (accept Llywelyn the Great, Llywelyn mab Iorwerth, Llywelyn ap Gruffufdd, or Llywelyn the Last)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 3
After  this  man's  trial,  Judge  William  Johnson  wrote  a  letter  questioning  the  trial's fairness.   Joe   LaRoche   and   George   Wilson,   as  well   as   Peter   Prioleau  [[pree-oh-LOH]], betrayed this man, leading to the deployment of an armed force under James Hamilton. This man  earned  his  independence  after  winning  the  lottery,  marrying  a  woman  named  Beck, and founding the "Bethel circuit." This man planned an event for Bastille Day, after which he intended to sail to Haiti. For ten points, name this man who led a failed 1822 slave revolt in Charleston.	ANSWER: Denmark Vesey (accept Telemaque)
At  this  battle,  Titus  Statilius  Taurus,  the  last  man  to  hold  multiple  consulships, received  the  surrender  of  his  opponent's  land  forces.  The  use  of  Liburnian vessels  and  the defection  of  Quintus  Dellius  helped  one  side  win  this  battle.  Marcus  Agrippa  fought  in  this battle against Lucius Gellius Polico and Gaius Sosius. The city of Nicopolis was founded after this  battle,  which  took  place in  the  Ambracian  Gulf.  After  this  battle,  a ruler  took  the  name Augustus. For ten points, name this 31 BC naval battle near Greece in which Cleopatra and Mark Antony lost to Octavian.	ANSWER: Battle of Actium   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 3
As aide-de-camp to Robert E. Lee, this man delivered the surrender ultimatum to John Brown before the  latter  was  captured  at  Harpers  Ferry.  During  the  Peninsular  Campaign,  this  man,  who  was  known for  his  “cavalier”  image,  conducted  the  “Ride  around  McClellan.”  This  man  was  mortally  wounded  at the Battle of Yellow Tavern and was known as the “eyes and ears” of his army. For ten points, name this Confederate general who commanded the cavalry of the Army of Northern Virginia.	ANSWER: J(ames) E(well) B(rown) “Jeb” Stuart
This man led an expedition in which men intestudoformation could not advance to meet the enemy Parthian horse archers. This man was executed by having molten gold poured down his throat to represent his wealth. Before his defeat at Carrhae, this leader crucified several thousand people after successfully defeating the revolt of Spartacus. For ten points, name this enormously rich Roman general who was a member of the First Triumvirate alongside Pompey and Caesar.	ANSWER: Marcus LiciniusCrassus
In this film, Kenneth Dahlberg is questioned about a$25,000 check he sent to certain individuals. In this film, the address books of two criminals are found to include references to CIA officer, E. Howard Hunt. Jason Robards won an Oscar for his portrayal of editor Ben Bradlee in this film. This film stars Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman. Based on a book written by its central characters, Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, for ten points, name this 1976 film about the Watergate scandal.	ANSWER: AllthePresident’sMen
This country’s leader banned the Birilik opposition party and may have kidnapped his own nephew, Jamshid. Hundreds of protestors in this country were massacred in Bobur Square in 2005 in Andijan. That massacre in this country was supposed retribution against the Islamist Hizb-ut Tahrir. British ambassador Craig Murray claims that two dissidents in this country were boiled alive by its president, Islam Karimov. For ten points, name this member of the Commonwealth of Independent States.	ANSWER: Republic of Uzbekistan
Deadly riots during the grand opening of this location inspired a similar structure, designed by Renzo Piano,  to  be  placed  on  an  artificial  island.  Goryo  Farm  was  absorbed  during  the  construction  of  this location which was the subject of the decade-long Sanrizuka Struggle. Construction on this location began after  projections  predicting  that  Haneda  Airport  would  reach  capacity  by  1970.  Japan  Airlines  has  its main hub at, for ten points, what international airport serving Tokyo?	ANSWER: NaritaInternational Airport (acceptNaritaKokusai Kuko; accept TokyoNaritaAirport; acceptNewTokyoInternationalAirport; acceptShinTokyoKokusaiKuko; acceptNRT; accept RJAA) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Backup Packet 1
Estes Kefauver introduced the bill that called for this amendment, which dealt with a body introduced in  Article  II,  Section  1  of  the  Constitution.  Other  than  Minnesota,  the  central  region  in  question  in this  amendment  was  the  only  source  of  electoral  votes  for  Walter  Mondale  in  1980.  A  Home  Rule  Act established  the  office  of  mayor  in  the  area  affected  by  this  amendment.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1961 amendment that provided voting rights to the District of Columbia.	ANSWER: 23rd Amendment
These  edible  items  were  used  to  spread  messages  in  a  scheme  conceived  by  Liu  Bowen  and  future Hongwu Emperor Zhu Yuanzhang to overthrow the Yuan Dynasty. These edible items may have imprints of Lady Chang’e and are commonly eaten on the 15th day of a certain month. These food items received worldwide attention in 2019 when pro-democracy protestors in Hong Kong began using them as a symbol. For ten points, name these Chinese cakes named after a celestial object.	ANSWER: Mooncake(acceptYu`ebing)
People  of  this  ethnic  group  lost  the  Battle  of  Avarayr  to  the  Sassanian  empire.  The  greatest  ruler of  these  people  formed  an  alliance  by  marrying  a  non-Egyptian  Cleopatra,  prompting  Lucius  Licinius Lucullus  to  invade.  The  first  Christian  kingdom  in  the  world  was  formed  by  this  ethnic  group,  whose national symbol is Mount Ararat. The Orontid Dynasty was ruled by members of, for ten points, what Eurasian ethnic group based in and around Yerevan?	ANSWER:Armenians
Marshal W.F. Degan was murdered during this event, at which the sniper Lon Horiuchi controversially killed  the  central  target’s  pregnant  wife  Vicki.  Culminating  in  the  arrest  of  Kevin  Harris  and  former Green Beret, Randy Weaver, this event and a similar event the following year involving David Koresh’s Branch  Davidian  Compound  in  Waco  were  sources  of  inspiration  for  the  perpetrators  of  the  Oklahoma City bombing. For ten points, name this eleven-day siege in 1992 in Idaho.	ANSWER: RubyRidgeSiege (accept answers including “Standoff,” “Incident,” etc.)
This man argued that supermajorities should be able to overturn Supreme Court decisions in his bookSlouching Toward Gomorrah. According to Ted Kennedy, “Schoolchildren could not be taught about evolution” if this man was appointed to a post that opened with the retirement of Lewis Powell. After the failure of this man’s nomination to that post, Anthony Kennedy was chosen instead. For ten points, name this conservative whose Reagan-era Supreme Court nomination was not approved.	ANSWER: RobertBork Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Backup Packet 1
Chairman Howard Smith tried to stop the passage of this act, which was lobbied for by Joseph Rauh and Clarence Mitchell. Barry Goldwater opposed this bill saying, “you can’t legislate morality”, while the president in office during this bill’s passage noted that “we might lose the South, but those sorts of states may be lost anyway”. Ardent segregationist Robert Byrd filibustered this bill. Lyndon Johnson passed, for ten points, what act that barred racial discrimination in public areas such as schools?	ANSWER: 1964 CivilRightsAct
Artifacts  from  the  Ochre  Pottery  Culture  have  been  found  alongside  materials  made  from  this substance, which the Laguna Inscription was written on. Ancient pollution due to this substance has been recorded in Jordan’s Wadi Feynan, which contained one of the largest Roman mines of this substance. This substance almost entirely comprised the axe that Otzi “the Iceman,” was buried with. The Chalcolithic Age is named for, for ten points, what substance that is often combined with tin to make bronze?	ANSWER:copper
Regions on the boundaries of these areas were called purlieu. Henry III reformed laws in these areas via  a  1217  Charter  that  gave  free  men  access  to  them  after  they  had  been  established  by  William  the Conqueror  as  outside  of  common  law.  The  Dean  one  of  these  places  was  a  source  of  charcoal  and  the New one was a habitat for many animals. The Sherwood one of these locations was where Robin Hood supposed  hid  at  Major  Oak.  For  ten  points,  name  these  wooded  areas  that  were  once  where  Norman Kings could hunt deer.	ANSWER: Royal Forest(orKingswood)
While  stationed  just  east  of  this  city,  British  army  surgeon  Richard  Shuckbrugh  may  have  been inspired  to  write  “Yankee  Doodle.”  This  city  was  incorporated  by  the  Dongan  Charter,  the  oldest  city charter in the Western Hemisphere. Martin Van Buren created a regency in this city which dominated its states politics. In 1754, representatives gathered in this city to discuss the French and Indian War. For ten points, name this city where Benjamin Franklin proposed a Plan of Union, the capital of New York.	ANSWER:Albany
The  settlement  of  Lagunetas  on  this  body  of  water  is  made  up  of  “palafito  homes.”  The  5.4  mile long Rafael Urdaneta Bridge services this body of water. Lightning storms are common where this body of  water  meets  the  Catatumbo  River.  The  explorer  Alonso  de  Ojeda  became  the  first  European  to  see this body of water, where he noticed natives living on stilt houses. 18% of this body of water is victim to  a  duckweed  infestation.  For  ten  points,  identify  this  large  tidal  estuary,  sometimes  called  a  lake,  on Venezuela’s northern coast.	ANSWER: Lake Maracaibo Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 1
This battle inspired the legend of lieutenants Coghill and Melvill, who had nearly escaped to safety carrying  the  Queen’s  standard.  A  solar  eclipse  rose  over  this  battle  during  the  final  stand  of  Anthony Durnford. Garnet Wolseley was ordered to replace Lord Chelmsford after this battle. After an ultimatum from Bartle Frere expired, the losing side in this battle crossed the Buffalo River only to be overrun by the enemyimpi. For ten points, identify this opening battle of the Anglo-Zulu war, a defeat for Great Britain.	ANSWER: Battle of Isandlwana
A  concerto  for  this  instrument,  written  in  2015  for  Antoine  Tamestit,  has  the  soloist  walk  around the  orchestra  and  scream  at  various  moments.  Shostakovich’s  last  work  is  a  sonata  for  this  instrument that honors Beethoven by quoting the “Moonlight Sonata.” This instrument is the soloist in a symphony inspired by Lord Byron’s Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage, but the number of rests in its solo upset the work’s patron,  Niccolo  Paganini.  For  ten  points,  name  this  string  instrument  that  is  smaller  than  a  cello  and larger than a violin.	ANSWER: viola
A Republican Senator running for re-election in this state was widely criticized for calling an Indian man  “macaca”  in  2006.  A  random  drawing  for  a  state  delegate  seat  in  this  state  in  2017  was  lost  by Democrat Shelly Simonds. Ken Cuccinelli and Ed Gillespie  were failed gubernatorial candidates in this state. Recent sexual assault allegations and blackface incidents have plagued this state’s top 3 Democratic leaders. For 10 points, name this mid-Atlantic state led by embattled governor Ralph Northam.	ANSWER: Virginia
These  people  were  assigned  an  autonomous  state  in  the  1654  March  Articles  which  followed  the Pereyaslav Council, where these people agreed to swear fealty to and militarily serve the Russian Empire. One of these people, Yermak Timofeyevich, conquered the Khanate of Sibir. As head of the Zaporizhian Host, a leader of this group betrayed Charles XII at Poltava and was the hetman Ivan Mazeppa. For ten points, name these militaristic Slavic people who lived along the Don and Dnieper rivers in Ukraine.	ANSWER: Cossacks
Note: country and branch of military required.Mason Patrick served as this branch’s first commander. This  branch  redeemed  its  failure  in  the  Shasta  disaster  with  a  successful  attack  on  the  Rex.  George Kenney pioneered a “skip” technique used by this branch. The sinking of theOstfriedlandby this branch was  led  by  Billy  Mitchell,  who  argued  that  its  forces  should  be  used  to  sink  battleships.  This  branch’s military academy is located in Colorado Springs. Eddie Rickenbacker and Curtis LeMay belonged to, for ten points, what branch of the U.S. military?	ANSWER: U.S.AirForce(acceptUSAF; prompt on partial answer) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 1
One  of  this  ruler’s  defeats  inspired  a  man  called  the  Master  of  Hungary  to  launch  the  Shepherds’ Crusade. With James I of Aragon, this ruler signed the Treaty of Corbeil. He suppressed the rebel Hugh of Lusignan at the Battle of Taillebourg. This subject of a biography by Jean de Joinville was defeated at the Battle of Fariskur, part of a campaign in which he captured Damietta but failed to conquer Egypt. For ten points, name this leader of the Seventh Crusade, the only French king to be canonized.	ANSWER: LouisIX[9] (acceptSaintLouis; prompt on Louis)
Ron Walters led the push to desegregate this state’s Dockum Drug Store lunch counters in 1958. In the  1850s,  Benjamin  Singleton  helped  make  this  state’s  community  of  Nicodemus  and  the  surrounding area  become  the  destination  of  many  newly  freed  African  American  migrants  called  Exodusters.  In  the 1950s, 13 families in this state’s capital city sued to be allowed to attend Sumner Elementary and other schools. For ten points, name this state where Oliver Brown and others sued the Board of Education of Topeka.	ANSWER: Kansas
This  event  inspired  a  song  set  to  a  melody  by  Dmitri  Pokrass,  “Zog  Nit  Keynmol.”  Rachel,  Paul, and Rachella recount their experiences of this event in a piece for string quartet and tape by Steve Reich, Different  Trains. An Arnold Schoenberg piece set during this event ends with a quote from the “Shema Yisroel.”A Survivor from Warsawdepicts, for ten points, a target of what campaign in which the Nazis killed six million Jews?	ANSWER: the Holocaust(orShoah)
An  investigation  of  the  standards  of  these  institutions  was  published  in  the  1910  Flexner  Report. Harriot Hunt was the first woman to apply to one of these institutions, which was overseen at the time by  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  Sr.  Two  Scotsmen  founded  the  first  of  these  institutions  in  America  at  the University of Pennsylvania. After facing rejection from 29 of these institutions, one of them in Geneva, New York finally accepted Elizabeth Blackwell. For ten points, name this type of educational institution.	ANSWER:medicalschools  (accept  equivalents  likemedicalcolleges;  prompt  on  school,  college, university, etc.; do not prompt on hospital)
Panicked police officers fired their weapons during this event, probably because of an earlier incident in  which  nine  constables  died  at  Cato  Manor.  UN  Resolution  134  was  passed  after  this  event,  which constituted  “gross  human  rights  violations”  according  to  the  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission. Umkhonto we Sizwe, the military wing of the ANC, was founded in the wake of this event, which occurred after Hendrik Verwoerd expanded apartheid policies. Protesters against the Pass Laws were shot in, for ten points, what 1960 massacre in what is now Gauteng in South Africa?	ANSWER: SharpevilleMassacre Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 1
Several workers hired to create this route were killed in a raid on Martin’s Station. A notable portion of what would become this route was first crossed by a European after Gabriel Arthur was captured by the Shawnee. Speculator Richard Henderson founded the Transylvania Company, which was tasked with creating this route starting at Fort Chiswell. Farm supplies were brought to what became the future states of Kentucky and Tennessee via, for ten points, what road that passed through the Cumberland Gap and was blazed by Daniel Boone?	ANSWER: WildernessRoad
A now-ruined building in this city named Etemenanki may have been destroyed by Sennacherib. A set of remains decorated with aurochs and blue bricks that was relocated from this city was reconstructed in the Pergamon Museum in Berlin. While drinking from vessels stolen from the first temple, a king of this city stares at a disembodied hand and illuminated Hebrew letters in Rembrandt’s painting ofBelshezzar’s Feast.  The  Ishtar  Gate  led  to  the  inner  part  of,  for  ten  points,  what  city  that  contained  a  temple  to Marduk and was led by King Nebuchadnezzar?	ANSWER: Babylon
This leader passed theRosatellumlaw to reform electoral politics and abolished labor vouchers after pressure from the CGIL union. The 2017 G7 summit was hosted by this leader, who faced pressure from the Northern League and Five Star Movement in a recent election. Sergio Mattarella appointed this man to his highest post in December 2016, but dissolved his Parliament just over a year later. Matteo Renzi was succeeded by, for ten points, what Prime Minister of Italy who announced his resignation in March 2018?	ANSWER: Paolo Gentiloni
Governor  Lawton  Chiles  coordinated  the  response  to  this  event,  which  significantly  damaged  the Charles Deering Estate. Homestead Air Force Base was devastated by this event, which destroyed 99% of the mobile homes in Homestead. In response to this event, the frustrated demand “Where in the hell is the cavalry on this one?” was made by Kate Hale, emergency manager for Dade County. Over $25 billion in damage was caused by this event, a record that stood until Katrina in 2005. For ten points, name this deadly hurricane that struck Florida in 1992.	ANSWER: Hurricane Andrew
In this modern-day country, Nikola Karev briefly led the breakaway Kruˇsevo Republic against the Ottoman Empire. The Treaty of Niˇs [neess] forced Bulgarian Prime Minister Aleksandar Stamboliyski to crack down on the activities of IMRO, a group named for this country; IMRO captured and assassinated him.  This  country  is  officially  recognized  under  the  acronym  FYROM  due  to  a  naming  dispute  with its  southern  neighbor.  For  ten  points,  name  this  southernmost  of  the  former  constituent  countries  of Yugoslavia, a country that shares its name with a region in Northern Greece.	ANSWER: Macedonia(acceptFormerYugoslavRepublicofMacedonia before “FYROM” is read; do not accept Macedon) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 1
The Delimitation Protocol between these two countries failed to resolve the undefined area of Bozai Gumbaz. A quasi-war between these two countries began when William Bentinck attempted to establish a  trade  route  to  Bukhara  and  culminated  in  a  military  standoff  in  the  Panjdeh  Incident.  The  Pamir Boundary  Commission  helped  mediate  one  rivalry  between  these  two  empires  by  setting  the  border  of Afghanistan, thus ending the “Great Game.” For ten points, name these two colonizing empires that were led by Queen Victoria and Tsar Nicholas I respectively.	ANSWER: RussiaandtheUnitedKingdom (accept GreatBritainorEnglandfor UK; do not accept the Soviet Union for Russia)
This group was satirized in a Puck cartoon that depicted its members as planets revolving around Richard Croker. William Mooney was elected as the first Grand Sachem of this group, whose name derives from a leader of the Lenape Tribe. After the most famous leader of this group died in Ludlow Street Jail, it was purged by “Honest” John Kelly. The Locofoco faction was formed to oppose this group, which was depicted  as  a  tiger  killing  democracy  in  a  Thomas  Nast  cartoon.  For  ten  points,  name  this  New  York political machine controlled by Boss Tweed.	ANSWER: TammanyHall
Anthony van Dyck created a portrait of Charles I in the midst performing this action, dismounted from  his  horse.  In  another  painting  illustrating  labors  of  different  months,  people  who  attempted  this action return unsuccessfully down a snowy hillside. A series of seven works depicting this action culminates includes one of the title animal “at the fountain” and culminates with a tapestry showing a unicorn caught in an octagonal pen. For ten points, identify this practice of killing animals.	ANSWER: hunting
One man with this name was murdered by a mob led by Scipio Nasica, while another was killed by Lucius Opimius and his allies. One man with this name had his policies rolled back while he oversaw the resettlement of Carthage as part of his Sempronian Laws. Two men with this cognomen served as plebeian tribunes and tried to break up the lands of wealthy landowners. For ten points, name this cognomen of Tiberius and Gaius, two brothers who were killed for proposing reforms of the Roman Republic.	ANSWER: Gracchus(accept  Tiberius  and/or  GaiusGracchus;  accept  descriptions  of  theGracchi brothers; acceptTiberiusuntil “Lucius” is read)
Thomas  Common’s  translation  of  this  concept  built  upon  George  Bernard  Shaw’s  translation  and was  opposed  by  Walter  Kaufman,  the  most  famous  translator  of  works  by  this  concept’s  author.  The life-affirming  nature  of  this  concept  is  contrasted  with  the  “last  man”  in  one  work.  While  not  initially racially conceived, this concept was appropriated by the Nazis to represent the biologically superior Aryan race. For ten points, name this philosophic concept representing the pinnacle of mankind in the work of Friedrich Nietzsche.	ANSWER: the Ubermensch(acceptsuperman) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 1
This man labeled rival Rick Stokes an “Uncle Tom” during a campaign against the Alice Democratic club. He noted that “we are coming out to fight the lies, the myths, the distortions” in his Hope Speech, given in opposition to a bill mandating discriminatory requirements to work in public schools. This man’s murderer claimed to have gone insane after a Twinkie binge. Dan White assassinated, for ten points, what “Mayor of Castro Street,” the first openly gay man to be elected to political office in California?	ANSWER: Harvey Milk
One of these women saved her first husband’s life by pleading with the leader of a band of outlaws. One of these people died childless after criticizing a man for his public dancing. Another of these women bore a child who died soon after birth, which was divine punishment for committing adultery with a man who had earlier watched her bathe; that woman’s next child succeeded her husband as the king of Israel. For ten points, name this group of women, including Abigail, Michal, and Bathsheba, who were spouses of a certain Jewish monarch.	ANSWER: wivesofDavid
Welsh people settled this region’s Chubut Valley, and it is home to a glacier that is still advancing, the  Perito  Moreno.  The  first  president  of  one  country  that  shares  it  is  memorialized  in  its  Bernardo O’Higgins National Park. Its native Tehuelche [tuh-wel-chee] people were taller than Europeans at first contact, leading to the legend that it was inhabited by giants. For ten points, name this region, sometimes defined as including the archipelago of Tierra del Fuego, that takes up the southern portion of Chile and Argentina.	ANSWER: Patagonia
Among  one  tribe,  Valentine  McGillycuddy  was  known  as  “Friend  of”  this  man,  who  served  as  a decoy during the Fetterman Massacre. After fighting in Red Cloud’s War, this man surrendered at Fort Robinson  to  George  Crook  and,  four  months  later,  was  stabbed  with  a  bayonet  in  an  escape  attempt. Korczak Ziolkowski died in 1982 before finishing a monument of, for ten points, what Lakota warrior who fought alongside Chief Gall and Sitting Bull in the Battle of Little Bighorn?	ANSWER: CrazyHorse(orThasunkeWitko)
Among the oldest recorded examples of these objects are the Lakshmi Plaques of the Chera dynasty and the Maneless Lions created by King Mahasen. In Jaffna, the “Dutch Dumps” were examples of these items made out of copper by the Dutch East India Company. These items were punch-marked in early Indian  history.  Akbar  commemorated  a  new  millennium  of  Islamic  history  by  inscribing  “alf”  on  these objects. In the 20th century, the value of these objects changed via decimalization, so 100 Indian paisa are equivalent to 1 rupee. For ten points, name these objects studied by numismatists interested in early Indian economies.	ANSWER: coins  (prompt  on  other  terms,  like  money,  currency,  etc.;  do  not  accept  or  prompt  on descriptions of paper money) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 1
A National company in this industry was founded by Henry “Judge” Moore. Its not in the financial industry, but a man named Charles Schwab founded a company in this industry named for Bethlehem, Pennsylvania. The largest of these companies was founded by J.P. Morgan from a company once owned by a Scottish entrepreneur who wrote “The Gospel of Wealth.” For ten points, name this industry whose largest company is named “U.S. [this]” and was originally formed by Andrew Carnegie.	ANSWER: steelindustry
This  goddess’s  control  of  the  southern  part  of  an  island  was  confirmed  after  she  attacked  another goddess’ snow mantle during a sledding competition. This goddess’ sister Namaka flooded the holes she dug in an attempt to find a home; this goddess eventually took up residence in the Navel of the World. This  daughter  of  Haumea  and  Wakea  names  a  type  of  glass  strand  ejected  from  underground.  For  ten points, name this Polynesian fire goddess who lives in Mauna Loa and who, mythologically, created the Hawaiian Islands.	ANSWER: Pele
In  1969,  this  man,  along  with  Ralph  Abernathy  and  Walter  Mondale,  led  marches  through  the Coachella Valley against illegal immigration. Philip Vera Cruz resigned from this man’s organization after this  man  endorsed  Ferdinand  Marcos.  This  man’s  Proposition  14  was  defeated,  but  he  did  successfully lead  the  Delano  Strike.  March  31st  is  the  namesake  holiday  of  this  man  whose  phrase  “Si,  se  puede” [pway-day]  inspired  “Yes  I  can,”  President  Obama’s  slogan.  For  ten  points,  name  this  co-founder,  with Dolores Huerta, of the United Farm Workers union.	ANSWER: C ́esar EstradaCh ́avez
The “new” version of this study was pioneered by a man who humiliated Adriaan van Roomen in a  problem-solving  challenge,  Franciscus  Vieta.  The  earliest  instance  of  this  discipline  was  found  on  the Strassburg  tablet.  Jean-Robert  Argand  published  the  first  rigorous  proof  for  the  fundamental  theorem of  this  discipline  in  1814.  This  discipline’s  name  was  coined  by  a  scholar  in  the  House  of  Wisdom, al-Khwarizmi. For ten points, name this branch of mathematics that involves manipulating and solving equations.	ANSWER: algebra
Haci I Giray founded a state in this region that gained nominal independence in the Treaty of Kuchuk Kainarji.  Alfonso  La  Marmora  and  Aimable ́ Pelissier  fought  together  in  a  campaign  in  this  region.  A year  later  in  this  region,  Pavel  Liprandi’s  forces  retreated,  thinking  that  a  large  force  lay  behind  Colin Campbell’s 93rd Regiment, which had formed the “thin red line.” The Siege of Sevastopol was interrupted by the Battle of Balaclava in an 1850s war named for this region. For ten points, name this peninsula that juts into the Black Sea.	ANSWER: Crimean  peninsula  (orTaurisorTauricpeninsula;  acceptCrimean  Khanate;  accept Crimean War) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 11
A November 2015 book about this policy noted how it was primarily formulated by rocket engineers. This policy led to creation of a group of “black” individuals who could not receive education or health care services. The “4-2-1” problem was created by this policy, which also led to the phenomenon of “little emperors.” This policy exacerbated the use of sex-selective abortions in the country where it was enacted, leading  to  an  excess  of  over  30  million  males.  For  ten  points,  name  this  policy  which  limited  births  in China until 2015.	ANSWER: OneChildPolicy
During this battle’s preliminaires, either Daniel Wells or Henry McComas may have killed General Robert Ross. This battle was launched in response to destruction of property along Lake Erie, and was preceded by fighting at Hampstead Hill and North Point. Mary Pickersgill created one object used at this battle’s end. The song “To Anacreon in Heaven” supplied the melody for a work about this battle. For ten points, name this battle that inspired Francis Scott Key to write “The Star Spangled Banner.”	ANSWER: Battle of FortMcHenry(or Siege ofFortMcHenry; accept Battle ofNorthPointbefore mentioned)
Upon winning a game in this sport, Vitas Gerulaitis noted that “nobody beats Vitas Gerulaitis 17 times in a row!” In 2016, Raymond Moore, a tournament director in this sport, resigned after saying that women in this sport “are very, very lucky” to “ride on the coattails” of its men. In 2007, the final major championship of this sport announced gender pay equity; that championship is held at the All-England Club. For ten points, name this sport played at Wimbledon by Serena Williams and Roger Federer.	ANSWER: tennis
During this war, Scott O’Grady was rescued after being shot down while maintaining a no-fly-zone in Operation Deny Flight. One side in this war was supported by the White Eagles and Arkan’s Tigers. The Heliodrom prisoner camp was set up in this war, in which Operation Storm became the largest European battle since World War II. Under the leadership of Ratko Mladic [m’lah-ditch], the VRS and the Scorpions perpetrated the Srebrenica[sreh-breh-nee-tzah] massacre in this war. The Dayton Peace Accords ended, for ten points, what 1992-95 Yugoslavian war that broke out after an independent country was established at Sarajevo?	ANSWER:BosnianWar
This ruler’s daughter Enheduanna wrote a religious work titledThe Exaltation of Inanna. The birth legend of this leader, who  defeated king Lugal-Zage-Si of Umma, has been compared to  that  of Moses. This former servant of Ur-Zababa had his troops wash their weapons in the ocean to symbolize one of his conquests. This former cupbearer took control of Kish, Lagash, and Uruk to become the first emperor. For ten points, name this founder of the Akkadian Empire.	ANSWER: Sargonthe Great Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 11
In his concurrence to this Supreme Court case, Justice Goldberg listed his belief in an “absolute, unconditional privilege” around a certain issue. The majority opinion in this case notes an approximate cost of $4800 for an advertisement that was accompanied by a letter from  Asa  Philip  Randolph.  A  commissioner  from  Montgomery,  Alabama  brought  forth  this case, which established a standard for falsity known as “reckless disregard.” The notion of “actual malice” was central to, for ten points, what Supreme Court case dealing with a major newspaper from a Mid-Atlantic state?	ANSWER: New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (prompt on “Sullivan”; accept The New York Times Company v. L. B. Sullivan; accept NYT v. Sullivan)
This thinker outlined a theory in which three or more options ranked by preference can lead to intransitive results. Thomas Malthus’s population studies were partly inspired by this thinker’s notion of the “perfectibility of society” through progress in the sciences. This  mathematician  found  that,  when  the  probability  of  a  correct  outcome  per  juror  was over  50  percent,  adding  jurors  was  optimal  in  a  namesake  "jury  theorem."  For  ten  points, name this Enlightenment thinker, and namesake of an election method, who died in prison during the French Revolution.	ANSWER: Marquis de Condorcet (or Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas de Caritat; accept Nicolas de Condorcet; accept Condorcet's Jury Theorem; accept Condorcet Method))
The  Namal  Institute  was  founded  by  this  politician,  who  previously  was  chancellor of the University of Bradford. This politician admitted to ball tampering while a member of a team  that  won  the  1992  World  Cup  in  the  sport  he  played  professionally.  The  Khyber Pakhtunwa  formed  a  coalition  with  the  government  of this  former  cricketer  who  publicly stated  his  intention  to  restore  the  policies  of  Muhammad  Ali  Jinnah.  For  ten  points,  name this  politician,  the  first  Pakistani  prime  minister  to  be  ousted  through  a  vote  of  no- confidence in 2022.	ANSWER: Imran Khan (or Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi)
A qibla [[KEE-blah]], reminiscent of one in Cordoba, can be found in this city’s Kutubiyyah  Mosque.  The  El  Badi  Palace  can  be  found  in  this  city,  once  led  by  Thami  El Glaoui.  A  set  of  seven  patron  saints  are  venerated  in  this  popular  pilgrimage  site  for  Sufis. The Menara Gardens in this city were designed under Caliph Abd al-Mu’min, and the walls of this city were built under the orders of Ali ibn Yusuf, the fifth emir of the Almoravids. The African capital of the Almohad Empire was, for ten points, what "Imperial City" of Morocco.	ANSWER: Marrakech (or Marrakesh; accept Amarakus)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 13
In this election year, the failure of one vice presidential candidate to receive enough votes  led  to  a  contingent  election  in  which  Richard  Granger  was  defeated.  Hugh  Lawson White  was  among  the  four  candidates  from  the  Whig  Party  who  ran  in  this  year  in  which Daniel Webster was also a nominee. The winning vice presidential candidate in this election year claimed to have personally killed Tecumseh. Richard Mentor Johnson ran alongside the winner in this election year who was born in the Dutch region of Kinderhook, New York. For ten points, name this election year, a victory for Martin van Buren.	ANSWER: United States Presidential Election of 1836
A  thirty-five  year  study  by  this  scientist  was  inspired  by  a  sample  of  crystalline insulin provided by Robert Robinson. Along with Barbara Low, this scientist discovered that the  structure  of  penicillin  contained  the  B-lactam  ring.  The  first  structure  of  a  steroid, cholesteryl  iodide,  was  discovered  by  C.H.  Carlisle  and  this  scientist.  In  1964,  this  woman won  the  Nobel  Prize  in  Chemistry  for  discovering  the  structure  of  vitamin  B12.  For  ten points,  which  British  chemist  pioneered  the  use  of  X-Ray  crystallography  to  determine  the structures of biomolecules?	ANSWER: Dorothy Hodgkin (or Dorothy Mary Crowfoot; or Dorothy Mary Hodgkin)
This deity's cult center at Lagina, in the Anatolian region of Caria, was confused for a cult of Diana by Tacitus in a mistaken interpretation of the nickname "Trivia." The Deipnon [[DEEP-nohn]]  offering,  in  which  a  meal  was  served  on  an  altar  once  a  lunar  month, honored   this   goddess.   The kleidos   agoge [[KLAY-dohss   ah-GOH-geh]]   was   a   ritual performed  at  festivals  honoring  this  deity,  involving  a  young  girl  carrying  a  key  on  a  road leading to the city Stratonikea [[strah-toh-nee-KEH-ah]]. Regarded as a protector of homes, for ten points, who was this Greek goddess of magic?	ANSWER: Hecate [[HEH-kah-teh]] (or Hekate; accept phonetic pronunciations)
The Lorenzen Group fought against this movement, which included members of the Churchill Club. This movement opposed a government that referred to its central country as “the Cream Front” due to the abundance of dairy products there. BOPA  and  Holger  were among the groups that made up this movement, described in Lois Lowry’s book Number the Stars.  Christian  X  [[the  tenth]]  was  seen  as  a  symbol  of  this movement,  perhaps  due  to  his short  reply  to  a  telegram  sent  by  Hitler.  For  ten  points,  name  this  insurgent  movement against the Nazis in cities like Copenhagen.	ANSWER: Danish Resistance (accept Den danske modstandsbevægelse; accept descriptive answers indicating resistance against Germany or the Nazis in Denmark)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 13
Ustad  Mansur  was  a  court artist  during  this  empire  and  was  the  earliest  to  depict the  dodo  bird  in  color.  The  Persian  artist  Abd  al-Samad  was  commissioned  by  a  leader  of this  empire  to  paint  miniatures  for  books  such  as  the Tutinama.  Rulers  of  this  empire commissioned the Shalimar Gardens and brought in leading architects to design the city of Fatehpur  Sikri.  A  ruler  of  this  empire  commissioned  a  marble  mausoleum  for  his  wife, Mumtaz.  For  ten  points,  name  this  empire,  during  which  the  Taj  Mahal  was  commissioned by Shah Jahan.	ANSWER: Mughal Empire (accept Mogul Empire)
The  wife  of  Abu  Lahab  was  said  to  have  once  spitefully  thrown  these  objects  in Muhammad’s path. In a treatise, John Calvin claimed that five of these objects were in Bourges  [[BOORZH]]  and  an  unknown  amount were  in  Sienna.  Among  the  instruments  of the  Passion  was  an  object  made  of  these  materials,  which,  upon  its  placement,  was accompanied by a group exclaiming, “Hail, King of the Jews!" A relic made of these objects was  allegedly  used  during  the  Crucifixion to  mockingly  crown  Jesus.  For  ten  points,  name these  sharp  objects,  which,  according  to  a  Greek  proverb  and  the  glam  metal  band  Poison, every rose has.	ANSWER: Thorns (accept Crown of Thorns)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 13
This person was released from Castle Thunder in an 1864 prisoner exchange. While working as a field surgeon, this doctor met Frances Hook, a female Union soldier disguised as  a  man.  In  1907,  this  American published  "Crowning  Constitutional  Argument,"  claiming the  U.S.  Constitution  already  prescribed  women's  suffrage.  This  woman  was  arrested  as  a spy in New Orleans after helping a Confederate doctor with an amputation. For ten points, name this woman whose Medal of Honor was posthumously restored by Jimmy Carter.	ANSWER: Mary Edwards Walker
One  side  in  this  battle  threw  off  their  armor  as  they  were  fleeing,  leading  to heightened casualties in the Bloody Meadow. Lord Fauconberg’s archers benefited from the heavily  one-sided  winds  at  this  battle,  which  was  fought  during  a  snowstorm  on  Palm Sunday.  This  battle  led  to  the  deaths  of  Andrew  Trollope  [[TRAH-lup]]  and  the  Earl  of Northumberland.  An  estimated  50,000  soldiers  fought  at  this  battle,  often  considered the bloodiest battle fought in England. For ten points, name this 1461 Yorkist victory during the Wars of the Roses in which Edward IV deposed Henry VI.	ANSWER: Battle of Towton
Henry  Hester  served  as  the  long-term  secretary  of  this  building,  to  which he introduced  the  practice  of  trading  futures.  Originally  built  at  the  intersection  of  Gravier [[GRAH-vyer]]  and  Carondelet  [[kah-ron-deh-LET]]  Streets,  this  location  aimed  to  create  a more seller-friendly counterpart to a similar one in New York. An Edgar Degas [[deh-GAH]] painting sometimes erroneously titled for this location depicts the raw variety of its central good as well as stacks of bales. For ten points, name this building which facilitated the trade of a major Southern good, found in a Louisiana city.	ANSWER: New Orleans Cotton Exchange Building (prompt on partial answers)
One of these object’s named after the German city of Mainz [[MAINTS]] depicts Augustus flanked by two gods as Tiberius presents him a statue commemorating his victory. This object was largely replaced in combat when the spatha became more popular. After the reforms  of  Gaius  Marius,  this  weapon  was,  in  addition  to  the pugio, pila,  and scutum, standardized  for  legionnaires. Capulus was  the  term  for  the  hilt  of  these  objects  which allowed shielded infantry to fight with forward jabs. For ten points, name this short Roman sword.	ANSWER: Gladius (prompt on answers including "sword")  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 4
Before the Civil War, this general was court-martialed for attacking an enlisted man with the flat of his sword. This man succeeded William Tecumseh Sherman as the leader of the Army of Ohio, and during the Confederate Heartland Offensive, the Army of Mississippi inflicted  large  casualties  on  this  man's  troops  in  Kentucky.  Union  forces  at  the  Battle of Perryville were commanded by this man, three of whose divisions assisted Ulysses S. Grant at the Battle of Shiloh. For ten points, name this Union general with Spanish-sounding given names.	ANSWER: Don Carlos Buell
In  2009,  a  collection  of  this  writer's  papers  were  purchased  by  the  University  of Cambridge, including  letters  from  the Western  Front  and  Palestine, as  well as  a draft of  "A Soldier's Dedication." This writer fictionalized himself as George Sherston, whose innocence is  described  in Memoirs of a Fox-Hunting Man.  A  failed  counter-attack  is  the  title  subject  of one poem by this man, who became acquainted with a fellow poet while staying at a military hospital  suffering  from  shell  shock.  For  ten  points,  name  this  leading  World  War  One  poet who influenced his friend, Wilfred Owen.	ANSWER: Siegfried Sassoon
Bernardino  Verro  served  as  the  first  mayor  of  this  city  in  which  he  promoted “collective renting” among agricultural workers. The name of this city may have been inspired  by  a  warrior  with the  same  nickname  as Richard  I  of  England.  A  man  born  in  this city  named  Salvatore  Riina  was  known  as il capo dei capi or “the boss of bosses.” This city inspired  a  fictional  family  created  by  Mario  Puzo.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Sicilian  city which inspired the surname of the central family in The Godfather.	ANSWER: Corleone (or Curliuni)
The HMS York was employed by Lumley Leyster at this battle, during which the HMS Illustrious launched  21  Fairey  Swordfish.  The  Japanese  forces  that conducted  Pearl Harbor may have studied this battle, because it targeted a shallow harbor. Inigo Campioni’s [[kahm- PYOH-nees]]  fleet  was  attacked  by  Andrew  Cunningham's  forces  in  this  battle,  which featured  wide use  of  torpedo  bombers.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1940  naval battle,  fought around an Italian harbor.	ANSWER: Battle of Taranto  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 4
After launching the Louisbourg expedition, this man used a massive payment in gold and  silver  from  the  U.K.  to  end  the  use  of  paper  currency.  This  man  bequeathed  money  to build  Holden Chapel  and  served  as  lieutenant  governor  to  Thomas  Pownall.  This  man traveled  with  Jonathan  Belcher  to  negotiate  with  the  Abenaki  and  married  Pelef  Sanford's granddaughter,   Margaret,   securing   an   alliance   with   Andrew   Oliver.   Francis   Bernard appointed this man to the governorship he held during the Boston Massacre. For ten points, name this colonial governor of Massachusetts.	ANSWER: Thomas Hutchinson
An  1834  treaty  signed  in  this  country  acknowledged  one  of  its  freedom  fighters  as the   governor   of   Mascara   [[mah-SKAH-rah]].   A   leader   of   this   country   nicknamed   the "modern Jugurtha" [[yoo-GUR-thah]] participated in the Reghaïa [[reh-KHAI-ee-uh]] attack and  was  named  Emir  Abdelkader.  The  conquest  of  Biskra  occurred  in  this  country,  where many  Europeans  who  migrated  to  cities  like  Constantine  and  Oran  came  to  be  called pied- noirs [[pyehd-NWAHR]]. Forces under Charles X and Louis Philippe I defeated the dey of, for ten points, what North African country?	ANSWER: People's Democratic Republic of Algeria (or al-Dzayir)   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 4
In this state, the leader of the “Glass Tax” protest was pardoned by the president, because he was “ignorant of our language.” In another incident in this state, David Bradford organized dissidents after the  so-called  “Battle  of  Bower  Hill.”  Fries’s  Rebellion  took  place  in  this  state,  as  did  an  earlier  action protesting  a  controversial  1791  tax  favored  by  Alexander  Hamilton.  George  Washington  personally  led militia into, for ten points, what state to put down the Whiskey Rebellion?	ANSWER: Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
This  country  clashed  with  the  U.S.  during  the  Venezuelan  crisis  of  Grover  Cleveland’s  presidency. Historians believe the late 19 th century was the time of the “Great Rapprochement” between this country and the U.S. After the U.S. Civil War, this country resolved theAlabamaclaims with the U.S. and signed the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty. For ten points, name this European country which, as a result of actions like these, began forming the “Special Relationship” with the U.S.	ANSWER:UnitedKingdomof Great Britain and Northern Ireland (accept UK, Britain, or England)
This party fractured over the issue of foreign debt, leading to a break from the Democratic Current. This party was formed in the Maximato period by Plutarco El ́ıas Calles as the National Revolutionary Party.  The  “Hashtag  YoSoy132”  student  movement  protested  against  this  party  after  it  won  a  2012 election against the PRD. This party held its nation’s presidency every year from 1928 to 2000, but only under Enrique Pe ̃na Nieto since then. For ten points, name this Mexican political party.	ANSWER: InstitutionalRevolutionaryParty   (acceptPRI,   accept   PartidoRevolucionario Institucional)
A schoolteacher who helped form this group was assassinated in 1949 after Prime Minister Nokrashy Pasha was slain. A member of this group, Sayyid Qutb [KUT-buh], wrote a 30-volume commentary on Islam that indirectly influenced Osama Bin Laden. Founded in Ismailia by Hassan al-Banna, this group’s slogan is “Islam is the Solution.” President Nasser banned, for ten points, what Sunni Islamic movement in Egypt that rose to power during the 2012 Arab Spring under Mohamed Morsi?	ANSWER:MuslimBrotherhood(acceptSocietyoftheMuslimBrothers)
Bob  Herbert  claimed  that  this  book  brought  to  light  “sordid  realities  that  had  remained  hidden for too long.” Dorr’s Rebellion was a movement that this book’s author claims was part of the “Other Civil War.” This book’s author claims that James K. Polk’s warmongering was opposed by the general populace.  The  author  of  this  book  claimed  that  he  wrote  it  to  provide  a  “more  honest  take”  than  the “fundamental  nationalist  glorification  of  country.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  book  written  by  Howard Zinn.	ANSWER:A People’sHistoryoftheUnitedStates Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Backup Packet 2
A Valois prince was elected king of this state but returned to France with much of its treasury. This country’s history was marred by a series of invasions and conflicts known as “The Deluge.” This country was created by the Union of Lublin and governed by a bicameral parliament known as the Sejm [SEYM]. This country’s May 3 Constitution was the second codified constitution in the world. For ten points, name this country which was dismantled into three partitions by Russia, Prussia, and Austria.	ANSWER:Polish-LithuanianCommonwealth  (acceptRzeczpospolita,  acceptPoland-Lithuania, accept Crown of the Kingdom ofPolandand the Grand Duchy ofLithuania, acceptCommonwealth ofPoland)
John Price Buchanan, a governor of this state, faced a Knights of Labor-led uprising relating to the company  use  of  convict  labor  in  the  Coal  Creek  War.  A  company  named  for  this  state  that  worked  in coal, iron, and railroads later merged with U.S. Steel. Part of the Manhattan Project was located at this state’s  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory  near  Knoxville.  During  the  New  Deal,  FDR  proposed  a  federal corporation to provide electricity named for, for ten points, what Southern state?	ANSWER: Tennessee
John Quincy Adams noted that this agreement was what “speculative philosophers have imagined as the only legitimate source of government.” William Brewster is thought to have drafted this agreement. John Carver became governor after he was the first to sign this document, which created a “civil Body Politick.”  William  Bradford  was  among  the  signers  of,  for  ten  points,  what  governing  document  of Plymouth Colony, named for the ship on which the Puritans sailed to America?	ANSWER: MayflowerCompact
A  battle  with  this  instrument’s  name  was  won  by  the  Allies  in  Central  Cameroon  in  1915.  A surveillance software company with this name had its contract with the state of Utah suspended in April, 2020 after ownership’s connections with the KKK were discovered. This instrument was played by Pete Seeger  and  Earl  Scruggs  at  the  Grand  Ole  Opry.  For  ten  points,  name  this  instrument  associated  with both traditional African-American music and bluegrass, typically circular with four or five strings.	ANSWER:Banjo
This event was influenced by CIA propaganda that attempted to empower Cardinal Jozsef Mindszenty [mind-SENT-ee]. A government in this event issued the “For Freedom and Truth” proclamation. Tensions from this event spilled over to the “Blood in the Water” water polo match at the Melbourne Olympics in the same year. J ́anos[YAHN-oash] K ́ad ́ar was installed as chairman as a result of Soviet intervention in this event. For ten points, name this revolution in which Imre Nagy [NAHZH] tried to withdraw his country from the Warsaw Pact.	ANSWER:HungarianRevolution of 1956 (acceptHungarianUprising) Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Backup Packet 2
Much of the paper for this publication was produced in a city named for it, now a part of the city of Balakhna. This publication was run by the Ukrainian party Spilka before it moved to Vienna. A popular saying  said  that  there  was  no  news  in  a  contemporaneous  publication,Izvestia,  and  no  truth  in  this publication.  Though  not  Novy  Mir,  Nikolai  Bukharin  served  as  editor  of  this  publication,  as  did  Leon Trotsky. For ten points, name this paper, the mouthpiece of the Soviet Communist Party.	ANSWER: Pravda
In this state, eight year old Sissy Marcus kissed two African American boys, causing the boys to be charged with rape until being pardoned by Governor Clement Hodges. Reverend Douglas E. Moore helped lead a sit-in at a Royal Ice Cream shop in this state, which then inspired a similar event in which students from this state’s Agricultural and Technical State University participated in. Ezell Blair Jr. helped sit-in at a Woolworth’s store in this state. For ten points, what state saw the Greensboro sit-ins?	ANSWER:NorthCarolina
The  victor  of  this  conflict  had  seized  Shell  assets  on  Bonny  Island  in  order  to  fund  itself  with  oil reserves.After Operation OAU during this conflict, one side lost control of Port Harcourt and subsequently suffered severe famine. Bernard Kirchner founded Doctors Without Borders after seeing the casualties in this conflict, which began when Odemegwu Ojukwu created a new state for the persecuted Igbos. For ten points, identify this 1967 civil war that befell a country with capital Lagos.	ANSWER: The BiafranWar (accept theNigerianCivilWar)
Maternus  failed  to  kill  this  man  at  the  Festival  of  the  Great  Goddess.  Following  a  plot  by  prefect Tigidius  Perennis,  the  Phrygian  Cleander  replaced  Saoterus  as  this  man’s  chamberlain.  After  a  fire  in Rome, this man renamed the Senate and all the Roman people with his name. This emperor was killed by his mistress Marcia and the wrestler Narcissus. Believing himself to be a reincarnation of Hercules, this emperor fought animals like ostriches as a gladiator. For ten points, name this tyrannical son of Marcus Aurelius.	ANSWER: Commodus
In 2018, scientists at Purdue created the nanodumbbell, which does this action over 60 billion times per second. Olinde Rodrigues developed a formula to map this action into SO(3), the group of matrices for this action. Failure to include a fourth gimbal induced gimbal lock during the Apollo 11 mission, where this action is restricted. Objects can do this along a set of axes which for airplanes include yaw and pitch. For ten points, name this kind of motion where an object spins around an axis.	ANSWER:rotation(accept word forms, acceptrollingorrevolution, acceptspinbefore mention) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 2
In the 1910s, this country’s army suppressed rebels in Santa Caterina in the Contestado War. This country’s  Black  Needles  Military  Academy  traces  its  history  back  to  the  first  military  school  in  the Americas, which was founded by Maria the Mad. Ernesto Geisel and Artur da Costa e Silva were among the leaders of a military dictatorship that ruled this country from 1964 to 1985, following a coup against Jo ̃ao  Goulart.  For  ten  points,  name  this  country  whose  military  stifled  democracy  in  states  like  Minas Gerais and S ̃ao Paulo.	ANSWER: Brazil
Along with Robert Livingstone, this man met with Francois Barbe-Marbois to negotiate the Louisiana Purchase. Prosser’s Rebellion plotted to kidnap this man and hold him for ransom. After James Madison fired  John  Armstrong  during  the  War  of  1812,  this  man  held  both  the  Secretary  of  War  and  Secretary of  State  positions  concurrently.  This  man,  Frederick  Muhlenberg,  and  Abraham  Venable  uncovered Alexander Hamilton’s affair with Maria Reynolds. William Plumer stopped a unanimous Electoral College vote to re-elect this man to a second term as President. For ten points, name this President during the “Era of Good Feelings”, the Virginian successor to James Madison.	ANSWER: James Monroe
Olga Lengyel meets Irma Grese at one of these locations, in which Olga refuses to not have her hair cut. The narrator of one work set in one of these locations befriends Alberto but is later sent to the Ka-Be infirmary after he contracts scarlet fever. On a train to one of these locations, Madame Schachter screams hysterically after seeing visions of flames. Eliezer’s father dies during the death march from, for ten points, what type of locations depicted in Primo Levi’sIf This is a Manand Elie Wiesel’s autobiographyNight?	ANSWER: concentrationcamps (ordeathcamps,exterminationcamps,Konzentrationslager, acceptAuschwitz-Birkenau)
In  one  essay  about  this  concept,  the  author  argues  that  the  perception  of  this  concept  changed from being based on familiar work to becoming the structure for them. That essay by E. P. Thompson claims that shifting work-discipline centered around this concept helped create industrial capitalism. The sun and other celestial phenomena were often used to keep track of this concept prior to its mechanical regularization.  Radiation  from  a  cesium-133  atom  now  defines,  for  ten  points,  what  concept  that’s measured on clocks?	ANSWER: time
While serving as Swiss Director of the OSS, one man with this last name secretly negotiated with Karl  Wolff  as  part  of  Operation  Sunrise.  Another  member  with  this  surname  pushed  for  the  formation of SEATO and criticized Truman’s policy of containment in his bookWar and Peace. A politician with this surname established Operation 40, which trained Cuban exiles in counterintelligence operations; that man was later dismissed as CIA director after the disastrous Bay of Pigs Invasion. For ten points, give this shared last name of Allen Welsh and John Foster.	ANSWER: Dulles(accept John FosterDullesor Allen WelshDulles) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 2
This event led the sitting president to declare an end to the “termination” policy. John Trudell was the  spokesperson  and  radio  operator  for  the  perpetrators  of  this  event,  which  was  organized  by  Adam Fortunate Eagle. Unthanksgiving Day is a memorial dedicated to this event, whose location was used as the starting point for “The Longest Walk” by AIM. Coast Guard blockades cut off supplies during, for ten points, what 19-month-long protest by Native American activists on an island in San Francisco Bay?	ANSWER: American Indian Movement’s (or AIM’s) occupationofAlcatrazIsland (oroccupationof AlcatrazPrison, etc.; accept equivalents for “occupation;” prompt on partial answers)
This royal figure was forced to testify after Sir William Gordon-Cummming sued for slander as part of a baccarat scandal. Jean-Baptiste Sipido was acquitted by a Belgian court due to his youth after he tried to assassinate this man over the Boer War. This monarch died in the midst of a constitutional crisis that, after his death, led the House of Lords losing its veto power. For ten points, name this son of Victoria who was succeeded by George V after his 1910 death.	ANSWER: EdwardVII(acceptAlbertEdward; prompt on Edward)
A company from this country built thePhoenix, led by James George Shields. George Simpson helped negotiate an agreement with an official from this country over clashes at Redoubt Saint Dionysius. After a treaty with the Hudson’s Bay Company, Fort Langley and Fort Victoria produced wheat that was sold to this nation. Fur traders from this country were based at Fort Ross in California. Ferdinand Wrangel was an administrator from this country, whose colonial possessions included a capital city at Sitka. For ten points, name this country that sold Alaska to the US.	ANSWER: Russian Empire
This figure calls communism a “phantom” as the narrator of Robert Coover’sThe  Public  Burning. This man’s vice president wroteThe Canfield Decision, a novel in which America in 1983 has been taken over by liberal Zionists. A non-fiction work about this man’s administration described the roles of John Ehrlichman and H.R. Haldeman, advisors of this man. For ten points, name this subject of Bob Woodward and  Carl  Bernstein’sAll  the  President’s  Men,  published  in  1974  just  months  before  this  president’s resignation.	ANSWER: Richard Nixon
This  city’s  House  of  the  Cretan  Woman  is  located  in  a  place  of  worship  dedicated  to  a  Turkic slave-soldier.  A  Sicilianghulamnamed  Jawhar  was  tasked  with  founding  this  city,  which  is  home  to  a mosque dedicated to Ahmad ibn Tulun. Soldiers under Saladin made soles for their shoes out of books confiscated from the library of this city’s still-existing university at Al-Azhar. The Fustat was burned to prevent  this  city’s  capture  by  Crusaders.  For  ten  points,  name  this  city  whose  modern  incarnation  was founded by the Fatimids in Egypt as their last capital.	ANSWER: Cairo Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 2
In studying this psychological phenomenon, James Marcia identified “exploration” and “commitment” as two crucial elements. This quality can experience both “diffusion” and “foreclosure.” Martin Luther’s conflict between being a good son and a good monk prompted a stress of this concept according to Erik Erikson’sYoung  Man  Luther, which described 8 stages of development for this concept. For ten points, name this psychological concept, one’s distinct personality, whose failure to develop may cause a “crisis.”	ANSWER: identity
The plant from which this good was produced was originally calledxiquilite [she-kil-ee-tay] by the Nahuatl. Beauvais Raseau [boh-vayrah-zoh] wrote a well-known treatise on the history and production of this  good.  In  South  Carolina,  this  good’s  production  was  concentrated  in  highland  areas  not  suited  for rice production. The wife of Charles Pinckney, Eliza Lucas, helped establish the cultivation of this good as a major source of revenue in the colonies. For ten points, name this cash crop used in the textile industry as a blue dye.	ANSWER:indigo
Timothy Snyder claims that the death toll of this event has been exaggerated by a factor of 3, and that its perpetrators made no class-based discrimination so that it would not be labeled a genocide. As part of this event, “black boards” listing non-conforming enemies of the state were published outside villages. Lazar Kaganovich helped orchestrate this event by ordering collectivization and impossible grain export quotas. Well over 2 million people died in, for ten points, what 1932-33 genocidal disaster in Ukraine?	ANSWER: Holodomor(prompt on descriptions of a Ukrainian famine)
Although he was initially skeptical of natural selection, this scientist later defended the theory in his Critique of the Theory of Evolution. This scientist’s student, Alfred Sturtevant, published the first genetic map. This man, who established the biology department at Caltech after many years of work at Columbia University, won the Nobel Prize in Medicine for determining the role of chromosomes in genetics. For ten points, name this biologist who studied fruit flies.	ANSWER: Thomas Hunt Morgan
The Mackinnon-Sclater Road spanned this country and was replaced in the early 20th century by a  railway  described  as  the  “Lunatic  Line.”  This  country’s  city  of  Port  Florence  was  developed  as  the western terminus of that railway; the city is now named Kisumu. The construction of a bridge for that railway over this country’s Tsavo River was plagued by a pair of man-eating lions that killed dozens of workers. The Nandi people violently opposed British construction projects in, for ten points, what East African country that Teddy Roosevelt rode across on the Uganda Railway from its port city of Mombasa?	ANSWER:Kenya(accept  BritishKenya;  accept  BritishEastAfricaProtectoratebefore  “East Africa” is mentioned) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 2
Description  acceptable.  According  to  the  original  account  of  this  event,  it  ended  with  an  “act  of heroism” worth “more than a thousand [things], though blossomed with silver.” The target of this event was  attacked  after  the  perpetrator  “amused  himself  hacking  his  mother’s  pea  sticks.”  This  event  took place after its perpetrator was, at the age of six, “made the wealthy master of a hatchet,” according to an 1800 biography. For ten points, name this legend, told as a fable by Parson Weems, in which a six-year-old future American President admitted he “could not tell a lie” and confessed to arboreal vandalism.	ANSWER: George Washingtoncuttingdownacherrytree(accept additional information; prompt on partial answers; prompt on descriptions of “George Washington not being able to tell a lie” or similar response by asking the player “could not tell a lie about what?”)
During this dynasty, Chancellor Wang Anshi implemented the “New Policies,” which were criticized by  poet  Su  Shi,  leading  to  Shi’s  eventual  exile.  Mongke  Khan  died  while  besieging  this  dynasty  at  the Battle  of  Diaoyu  Fortress  in  Chongqing.  This  dynasty’s  rulers  resolved  border  conflicts  with  the  Liao dynasty, which was later overthrown in a combined effort by this dynasty and the Jurchen people. This dynasty is split into distinct “Northern” and “Southern” periods due to the loss of northern China to the Jin Dynasty in 1127. The first use of gunpowder came during, for ten points, what Chinese dynasty that was conquered by the Mongols in 1279?	ANSWER: SongDynasty
This event’s trophy, the Woodlawn Vase, was buried in Kentucky for protection during the Civil War. Survivor’s record margin of victory in this event in 1873 was not surpassed until 2004 by Smarty Jones. In 1973, employees ofDaily Racing Formconfirmed that Secretariat set a speed record of 1 minutes 53 seconds at this event, whose winner is draped in faux-Black-Eyed Susans. Pimlico Race Course annually hosts  this  event  in  Maryland  three  weeks  before  the  Belmont  Stakes.  For  ten  points,  name  this  second race of the Triple Crown.	ANSWER: PreaknessStakes (do not accept or prompt on Triple Crown)
In January 2017, this state prevented a passenger train painted in red, blue, and white from reaching the town of Mitrovica[mee-troh-veet-zah]. This state normalized relations with its northern neighbor as part of the 2013 Brussels Agreement. This state’s former Prime Minister, Ramush Haradinaj, was arrested by the French government in 2017. In 2008, this territory declared its independence, which was recognized by  the  United  States  but  not  Russia.  For  ten  points,  name  this  breakaway  Muslim  republic  of  Serbia whose capital is Pristina [prish-teen-ah].	ANSWER:Kosovo Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 2
This politician used his weekly radio show,Talk to the People, to read the Sunday comics to listeners during a newspaper deliveryman’s strike. This politician targeted Frank Costello by ordering the dumping of thousands of slot machines into the ocean. While in the House of Representatives, he co-sponsored a legislation that protected collective bargaining rights by outlawing “yellow dog” contracts. For ten points, identify this 20th century mayor of New York City who names an airport in Queens.	ANSWER: Fiorello LaGuardia
While being led to his execution, this man told fellow inmate Payne Best “This is the end; for me, the beginning of life.” This man, who distinguished between “cheap” and “costly” types of grace inThe Cost of Discipleship, was killed after being exposed as a co-planner of the July 20th Plot while he worked as anAbwehragent. This man worked with Karl Barth to help found the Confessing Church, which opposed the Protestant unification attempts of the Nazis. For ten points, name this Lutheran pastor and dissident.	ANSWER: DietrichBonhoeffer
This country’s Orange Walk District is home to the ancient city of Lamanai, and a logger discovered Caracol  here  while  searching  for  mahogany  trees.  European  settlers  here  known  as  Baymen  fought  the battle  of  St.  George’s  Caye.  This  country  relocated  its  capital  inland  in  response  to  1961’s  Hurricane Hattie, and was known as British Honduras until 1973. Belmopan is the capital of, for ten points, what Central American country that, like neighboring Mexico and Guatemala, is home to a number of Mayan ruins?	ANSWER: Belize
A  work  addressed  to  this  man  opens  by  noting  “In  view  of  your  low  grade...”  the  author  won’t “dignify your name” with “Mister,” and compares this man to Henry VIII. That letter calls this man’s recent  Nobel  Prize  a  “grim  farce”  and  notes  “like  all  frauds,  your  end  is  approaching.”  The  Church Committee confirmed this man’s suspicion of who wrote that anonymous letter, which was accompanied by an audiotape of an illicit affair when it was opened by this man’s wife in 1964. For ten points, name this activist who J. Edgar Hoover wiretapped and encouraged to commit suicide with the aforementioned letter.	ANSWER: Dr. Martin Luther KingJr.
At the first Council of Nicaea, this man legendarily struck Arius across the face. Every May 9, this man’s tomb in Bari is harvested for its holy manna, a clear oil. This saint, nicknamed “the wonderworker,” gave a poor man three gold balls as dowries for his daughters while this man served as the Bishop of Myra. At the beginning of Advent, this saint’s feast day commemorates his habit of putting coins in children’s shoes and giving gifts. For ten points, name this patron saint of children, immortalized as Santa Claus.	ANSWER:  SaintNicholas(acceptNikolaosof  Myra;  acceptSantaClausorSinterklausbefore “Santa Claus” is read) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 2
Bloody killings along a street in this country’s capital led that street to be called “Murder Mile.” The Treaty of Guarantee established the independence of this country, which was led by a man who attempted to overturn ethnic restrictions imposed on governmental positions in the London and Z ̈urich Agreements. In  1974,  Nikos  Sampson  overthrew  Archbishop  Makarios  III  in  this  country,  whose  incorporation  with Greece  was  an  example  ofenosis.  A  Green  Line  divides,  for  ten  points,  what  European  island  country with capital at Nicosia?	ANSWER: Republic of Cyprus
In one battle in this year, Emory Upton used innovative assault column tactics to storm the Mule Shoe salient. In this year, an unsuccessful assault followed the detonation of underground explosives by Ambrose Burnside’s men in the Battle of the Crater. The Battle of Spotsylvania Court House occurred in this year, as did the Battle of Yellow Tavern, in which J.E.B. Stuart died. The Siege of Petersburg began in  this  year  that  saw  the  Battle  of  the  Wilderness.  Sherman’s  March  to  the  Sea  took  place  in,  for  ten points, what year in which Lincoln was re-elected?	ANSWER: 1864
This period’s Shimotsuki Incident targeted the Adachi. Due to an earthquake, Sadaoki ordered his troops to purge his nominal superior at Heizen Gate. Kusunoki Masashige led forces in the Genko War during  this  period.  In  an  attempt  to  reassert  imperial  authority  during  this  period,  Emperor  Go-Toba started the Jokyu War against the Hojo regency. The ascension of Minamoto no Yoritomo started, for ten points, what period of Japanese history that succeeded the Heian?	ANSWER: Kamakuraperiod
One character in this novel is threatened with disinheritance after refusing John Brooke’s marriage proposal. While caring for the Hummel family, a musician in this novel dies of scarlet fever. A boy living next door to this novel’s protagonists marries the youngest of them after she returns from Europe; that boy  is  “Laurie”  Laurence.  This  novel  begins  with  its  protagonists  preparing  for  Christmas  while  their father serves in the Union Army. The series begun by this novel end by focusing on Fritz Bhaer’s wife in Jo’s Boys. For ten points, name this novel about the March sisters written by Louisa May Alcott.	ANSWER: LittleWomen
The USSCharrettewas given to this country’s navy and renamed theVelos, but its crew mutinied while  docked  at  Fiumicino.  Children  were  forcibly  evacuated  from  communist  controlled  areas  of  this country and into camps run by Queen Frederica of Hanover. This country was ruled by the “Regime of the Colonels,” and the Enosis movement sought to unite Cyprus with this country. For ten points, name this Balkan country whose capital is Athens.	ANSWER: Greeceor (HellenicRepublic)
One member of this group depicted his lover Hanna Fuchs-Robettin in hisLyric Suite, and another was  accidentally  killed  by  an  American  soldier  shortly  near  the  end  of  World  War  II.  The  founder  of this group wrote a piece in which the narrator recalls living in the sewers of the title ghetto,A Survivor From Warsaw. This group developed a compositional technique that replaced traditional harmony with tone rows. Anton von Webern and Alban Berg were students in, for ten points, what early 20th century avant-garde “school” led by Arnold Schoenberg in an Austrian city?	ANSWER: SecondVienneseSchool (acceptSecondViennaSchool Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 12
This  colony  was  home  to  a  political  family  that  included  Henry  Clay’s  1844  running  mate.  This state, the last north of the Mason-Dixon line to abolish slavery, was home to “Silk City,” the nickname for its city of Paterson. This state names a plan in which each state would have had a vote in Congress, contrasted with a plan named for Virginia. For ten points, name this state whose namesake college become the Ivy League’s Princeton University, and which also saw the Battle of Trenton.	ANSWER: NewJersey
[Note: description acceptable] This event was inspired by its performer’s time at a Magdalene Laundry. A  week  after  this  event,  Joe  Pesci  said  that  he  would  have  “grabbed”  this  event’s  performer  “by  her eyebrows.”  It  occurred  during  a  live  broadcast  of  a  rendition  of  Bob  Marley’s  “War”  and  encouraged viewers  to  “fight  the  real  enemy.”  In  its  aftermath,  the  religious  groups  protested  this  event  by  using steamrollers  to  destroy  records  of  songs  like  “Nothing  Compares  2  U.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  1992 incident in which an Irish singer desecrated an image of a religious leader on Saturday Night Live.	ANSWER:  Sinead O’Connorripping  up  apictureofthePopeJohn  Paul  II  (accept  synonyms  for “ripping” and “picture”; prompt on partial answers that do not include person, action, and specific item)
This lake’s Mumbo Island is home to an eco-friendly resort. After a failed attempt to build a mission on  Cape  Maclear  on  this  lake,  one  was  successfully  established  at  Livingstonia,  named  for  the  first European to discover this lake. This lake is home to over 500 species of fish that are divided into either the Mbuna or Peacock groups, the cichlids. For ten points, name this Rift Valley lake that shares its name with a nearby country with capital at Lilongwe.	ANSWER: Lake Malawi(or accept LakeNyasa)
The  papal  encyclicalMit Brennender Sorgecondemned  “with  burning  concern”  the  beliefs  and policies  of  this  government.  This  government  punished  prisoners  in  the  “priest  barracks”  after  it  was criticized in a Christmas address. The Catholic Centre Party was dissolved after an agreement between Ludwig Kaas and Franz von Papen, who served as Vice Chancellor in the early years of this government. Pope Pius XII was controversially accused of ignoring, and therefore being complicit in the crimes of, for ten points, what government that perpetrated the Holocaust?	ANSWER: NaziGermany (or theThirdReich; prompt on Germany; prompt on Reich)
In  April  2016,  five  police  officers  pled  guilty  to  various  charges  associated  with  shootings  on  the Danziger Bridge during this event. During this event, The decision to not declare a state of emergency for Jefferson, and Plaquemines[PLAK-uh-meen] was later blamed on Governor Kathleen Blanco. Shortly after being told “You’re doing a heck of a job” after this event, Michael Brown was fired from a government post. Refugees were trapped at the Superdome for several days after this event, which breached around 50 levees. For ten points, name this hurricane that devastated New Orleans in 2005.	ANSWER: HurricaneKatrina Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 12
In the majority opinion of this case, its author pre-empted a dissenting argument by claiming, “This is not a question of substituting the judgment of the court for that of the legislature.” The case West Coast Hotel v. Parrish marked the end of a period named for this court case, in which Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote a dissent claiming, “The Fourteenth Amendment does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer's Social Statics.” For ten points, name this Supreme Court case arising from a state law capping the number of hours bakers could work.	ANSWER: Lochner v. New York (or Joseph Lochner, Plaintiff in Error v. People of the State of New York; accept Lochner Era)
Following the Battle of Worringen, this city was granted town rights by Duke Adolf VIII [[the Eighth]] of Berg. This city's Stadtschloss housed a vast art gallery of the Wittelsbach family,  who  ruled  the  Electoral  Palatinate.  This  city's  district  of  Reisholz  was  severely damaged in an Allied attempt to destroy German oil refining capabilities during World War Two. Experiencing a historical rivalry with Cologne, for ten points, what is this city, the capital of North Rhine-Westphalia?	ANSWER: Düsseldorf (accept Dusseldorp)
This historian may have mistaken a species of marmot found in the modern Baltistan region   for   the   "Gold-digging   Ants"   of   Homeric   legend.   The   2nd   century   BCE   work, Arthashastra, [[ar-thah-SHAH-strah]] proved this man's claim that slavery did not exist in one culture  was  likely  invented.  After  signing  a  treaty  of  friendship  and  ceding  the  region  of Kandahar, Seleucus I Nicator [[seh-LOO-kus "the first" nee-KAY-tor]] deployed this diplomat to Pataliputra at the court of Chandragupta Maurya. The writer of Indika was, for ten points, what  Ancient  Greek  historian  who  wrote  the  first  thorough  western  records  of  the  Indian subcontinent?	ANSWER: Megasthenes [[meh-GAHS-theh-nees]]
The founder of this organization was the son of a Quaker Oats co-founder who also served as ambassador to Norway. R. Douglas Stuart, Jr. created this organization, which was supported by Burton Wheeler. A Dr. Seuss cartoon highlighting the words “foreign children” criticized this organization that opposed the Atlantic Charter. Members of this group included Sargent  Shriver  and  a  young  Gerald  Ford,  and  its  most  prominent  spokesman  was  aviator Charles  Lindbergh.  For  ten  points,  name  this  often  antisemitic  organization  that  promoted American non-interventionism in World War Two.	ANSWER: America First Committee (accept America First Party; Editor's Note: generously accept the inclusion of "Party" in the alternate answer despite it historically being a different, but similar, party that was disavowed by the "Committee")  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 14
A  2015  documentary  titled  for  this group  features interviews  with  Rolf  Lüders  and Sergio de Castro. Members of this group helped resolve the Crisis of 1982 through the use of price  bands.  This  group's  ideas  were  called  "El  Ladrillo,"  [[lah-DREE-yoh]],  or  "The  Brick." Miguel Kast, a member of this group, freed the peso's fixed exchange rate with the U.S. dollar. Key teachers of this group included Arnold Harberger and Milton Friedman. For ten points, name  this  group  of  Chilean  free-market  economists  who  advised  Augusto  Pinochet  [[pee- noh-CHEH]] and were educated at the namesake Midwestern university.	ANSWER: "Chicago Boys" (prompt on "University of Chicago" or "UChicago")
Yuri  Andropov  armed  this  leftist's  opposition, including  the  general  Hudson  Austin who formed a 6-day long military dictatorship. This politician's father, Rupert, died during "Bloody Monday," a leftist demonstration against the United Labor party of his nation's first post-independence  leader,  Eric  Gairy.  This  man  and  his  wife,  Jacqueline  Creft,  the  sitting Minister  of  Education,  died  by  firing  squad  in  the  capital  of  St.  George's.  Bernard  Coard's seizure of power and execution of, for ten points, what leader of the New Jewel Movement prompted an invasion of Grenada by the Reagan administration?	ANSWER: Maurice Bishop (or Maurice Rupert Bishop)
Michael Brodhead’s “A West, Nasty Job” focuses on this project, which was inspired by a recommendation by Orville Childs. Joint rights regarding this project were initially called for by a treaty, partly negotiated by Sir Henry Bulwer, but were eschewed after negotiations with Adolfo Diaz’s government and the signing of the Bryan-Chamorro Treaty. The Mosquito Coast  was  to  serve  as  the  endpoint  of  this  project,  opposed  by  Augusto  Sandinho.  For  ten points, name this proposed "Canal" that aimed to establish a path through a lake in a Central American country.	ANSWER: Nicaragua Canal (or Canal de Nicaragua; accept Nicaraguan Canal and Development Project; accept Nicaragua Grand Canal; accept Grand Interoceanic Canal)
Following  a  census  at  the  beginning  of  this  decade,  a  man  posited,  "American democracy was born of no theorist's dream" but "came out of the American forest." Frederick Jackson  Turner  put  forward  his  "Frontier  Thesis"  during  this  decade,  in  which  the  Billion Dollar Congress" was voted out of office. During this decade, the Sherman Silver Purchase Act authorized  the U.S.  government  to  buy  large amounts  of  silver, causing  an  economic  panic. For ten points, name this decade which included the rise of the Populist Party.	ANSWER: 1890s (accept the Gay Nineties; accept the Naughty Nineties; prompt on "90s" alone)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 14
One holder of this position is listed as the leader of the fourth and final “great age” in a  work  analyzing  societal  progress  after  the  medieval  era.  In  a  philosophical  work,  an example of a statement that both denotes and does not denote refers to the “present” holder of this position. That work by Bertrand Russell also asks if a holder of this position “is bald.” Voltaire wrote about the “age” of a holder of this position, whom many thinkers associated with  enlightenment  absolutism  during  his  72-year  reign.  For  ten  points,  give  this  position held by Louis XIV [[the Fourteenth]].	ANSWER: King of France (or Roi de France; accept King of the French; or Roi des Français; prompt on answers indicating “ruler of France”; do not accept or prompt on “Queen of France” or "King of the Franks"; prompt on “King” alone)
The DQI is modeled on the work of this man, who lends his name to a three-volume work by Colen Campbell. “Utility," “beauty,” and “strength” are listed as three central qualities of certain entities in this author’s best-known work. Levers relying on torsion springs were central  to  the ballista designed  by  this  weapons  designer.  During  the  Renaissance,  Leon Alberti studied the work of this man, who described the construction of aqueducts. For ten points, name this author of De Architectura, a noted Roman engineer.	ANSWER: Vitruvius (or Marcus Vitruvius Pollio; accept Vitruvius Brittanicus; accept Vitruvian)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 14
This  man's  sting  operations  resulted  in  over  four  thousand  arrests  and  fifteen suicides,  including  those  of  Ida  Craddock  and  Madame  Restell.  This  man  had  George Bernard  Shaw's Man  and  Superman removed  from  the  New  York  Public  Library  and targeted  birth  control  providers.  In  collaboration  with  the  New  York  state  legislature,  this man  founded  the  Society  for  the  Suppression  of  Vice.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Postal Inspector  whose  namesake  federal  laws  prohibited  the  mailing  of  material  which  was considered "obscene."	ANSWER: Anthony Comstock
William II [[the second]] de La Marck led a raiding group in this war which attacked Brielle  under  Willem  Bloys  van  Treslong.  That  group  in  this  war  used  the  slogan  "Rather Turkish than Pope" and were known as the Watergeuzen [[VAH-tuh-guhr-zen]]. The Twelve Years  Truce  and  the  Synod  of  Dort  divided  this  war  into  two  sections.  The  Council  of Troubles,  or  the  Blood  Council,  was  created  in  this  war  by  the  Duke  of  Alba.  Ghent  was pacified,  and  Antwerp  was  sacked  in  this  war.  Philip  II  tried  to  crush  a  revolt  in  the  low countries in, for ten points, what 1568 to 1648 war?	ANSWER: Dutch Revolt (accept Eighty Years' War; accept War of Dutch Independence)
In this case, Potter Stewart compared the central practice to “being struck  by lightning” and claimed that said practice was experienced by “a capriciously selected random handful.” The death of William Micke occurred during the central crime in this case in which an “evolving standard of decency” was invoked. The position affirmed in this case was  effectively  abandoned  with  a  decision  four  years  later  involving  Troy  Leon  Gregg. Dealing  with  a  burglar  who  killed his  victim,  this 1972 case  tested  the  Eighth  Amendment. For ten points, name this Supreme Court case dealing with the death penalty.	ANSWER: Furman v. Georgia (or William Henry Furman v. State of Georgia)
Works  by  this man subtitled The Good Soldier and His Rise and Fall were  among  the biographies  of  the  leaders  of  his  native  country.  A  work  by  Henry  Timrod  set  at  Magnolia Cemetery had the same theme as this man’s best known work, which begins by noting how “The  headstones  yield  their  names  to  the  element.”  Malvern  Hill  and  Bull  Run  are mentioned in that work by this man which repeats “Stonewall, Stonewall.” For ten  points, name this Southern U.S. poet of “Ode to the Confederate Dead.”	ANSWER: Allen Tate  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 5
An  illegitimate  member  of  this  family  may  be  shown  in Young  Girl  in  Profile. Gerolamo  Olgiati  and  Giovanni  Lampugnani  killed  a  duke  from  this  family  after  Christmas. Francesco   Piccinino   was   beaten   at   Montolmo   by   a   member   of   this   family,   which commissioned The Last Supper.  "Il Moro"  was  from  this  family,  who  fought  Louis XII in  the Italian  Wars,  making  weapons  from  the  bronze  intended  for  a  Leonardo  da  Vinci  statue  to win  at  Fornovo.  After  Filippo  Visconti  died,  the  Ambrosian  Republic  was  created,  followed by, for ten points, what family's rule?	ANSWER: Sforzas (accept Bianca Sforza; accept Galeazzo Maria Sforza; accept Ludovico Sforza)
A woman known as the “pythoness” of this state, Mary Lease, advised its farmers to “raise less corn and more hell.” An editorial written by a native of this state called on politicians to “Legislate the thriftless man into ease” and was used by McKinley supporters to   disparage   his   opponent   during   the   1896   election.   William   Allen   White   wrote   the aforementioned  editorial  for  the Emporia Gazette which  asked What’s the Matter with [this state]. For ten points, name this Midwestern state through which a railroad named for Santa Fe and two of this state's cities passed.	ANSWER: Kansas
In March 2021, this man was arrested in Boise for failing to wear a mask in court at his trial on misdemeanor charges. In July 2020, this man stated, "You must have a problem in your mind if you think that somehow the Black Lives Matter is more dangerous than the police."  This  man  participated  in  a  standoff  in  Nevada  over  the  question  of  his  father's unpaid  grazing  fees,  leading  to  the  death  of  LaVoy  Finicum.  For  ten  points, name  this  anti- government militant who led a group of far-right extremists in occupying Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in 2016.	ANSWER: Ammon Bundy
This  man  founded  the  predecessor  to  the  telecommunications  company  Intouch Holdings.  A  movement  against  this  man,  who  also  holds  Montenegrin  citizenship,  accused him  of  corruption  and  abuse  of  power  and  is  known  as  the  Yellow  Shirts.  This  man  was overthrown  in  a  2006  coup  and  replaced  as  leader  by  Sonthi  Boonyaratglin  [[SOHN-TEE BOON-JAH-RAHT-GLEEN]].  This  leader  cracked  down  on  Muslim  separatists  in  provinces including  Pattani  and  Narathiwat  [[NAH-RAH-TEE-WAHT]].  For  ten  points,  name  this founder of the Thai Rak Thai Party and former prime minister of Thailand, the older brother of Yingluck.	ANSWER: Thaksin Shinawatra [[CHEE-NAH-WAHT]] (be very lenient on pronunciation)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 5
This  person  headed  the  John  Steinbeck  Committee  and  served  as  an  alternate delegate to the U.N. under Harry Truman. While playing Hash-a-Motep in the movie She, this person  popularized  the  phrase  "She  who  must  be  obeyed."  Against  the  advice  of  William Malone,  this  woman  ran  in  an  election  in  which  Sheridan  Downey  and  Manchester  Boddy opposed her. This woman, whom Murray Chotiner referred to as the "Pin Lady," coined the term  "Tricky  Dick"  for  her  victorious  opponent Richard  Nixon.  For  ten  points,  name  this actress and politician.	ANSWER: Helen Gahagan Douglas
In  one  work  by  this  thinker  a  figure  known  as  Genius  accompanies  a  drunken  man who attempts to use his money chest’s key to unlock the gates of heaven. A request from the religious wife of a soldier for a work that would mend her husband’s conduct inspired a manual written by this man which was translated by William Tyndale. This author of Julius Exclusus and  proponent  of  the via media,  or  "middle  way,"  satirized  superstitions  common in Europe in a 1511 work. For ten points, name this “Prince of Humanists” who wrote In Praise of Folly.	ANSWER: Erasmus of Rotterdam (accept Desiderius Erasmus [Roterodamus])   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 5
George Stoneman’s failure at this battle may have been the reason for the Union defeat. Oliver Otis Howard’s 11th Corps were encircled in this battle when Stonewall Jackson secretly moved around their flank. The Union commander at this battle quipped, “May the Lord have mercy on General Lee for I will have none,” shortly before his troops were forced back across the Rappahannock River. For ten points, Joseph Hooker was defeated by Robert E. Lee in what 1863 battle near a Virginia village?	ANSWER: Battle of Chancellorsville(acceptChancellorsvillecampaign)
In this country, students wore yellow T-shirts to protest increased phosphorite mining in L ̈a ̈ane-Viru [LAH-nehVEE-roo]  County.  This  country  experienced  the  Era  of  Silence  under  Konstantin  Pats  in opposition to the Vaps Movement. This country’s army, led by Johan Laidoner, fought together with the White Russians in a War for Independence that was ended by the Treaty of Tartu. For ten points, name this nation where people demonstrated at the Tallinn Song Festival Grounds.	ANSWER: Republic ofEstonia(acceptEestiVabariik)
A prime minister from this party supported a 10% goods and services tax in his country and served four terms from 1996 to 2007. Robert Menzies and Malcolm Fraser were among the leaders of this party, as  was  Tony  Abbott  during  the  tenure  of  Julia  Gillard  when  this  party  was  the  Opposition.  In  a  2019 election, this party’s leader, Scott Morrison, was elected as prime minister. For ten points, what is this Australian political party that opposes Labor?	ANSWER: LiberalParty of Australia
This policy was expanded by the Scott Act, which prohibited re-entry to the United States. Support for this act was drummed up by Denis Kearney and the Workingman’s Party. This act was preceded by the less-comprehensive Page Act and later repealed by the Magnuson Act. Supporters of this act blamed “coolies” for depressed wages in places like San Francisco. Chester Arthur signed this act into law in 1882. For ten points, name this act that barred immigration from a large Asian country.	ANSWER: ChineseExclusionAct
The  “best  antidote”  to  this  religious  movement  was  drowning,  according  to  Holy  Roman  Emperor Ferdinand  I,  who  ordered  the  execution  of  Michael  Sattler,  the  writer  of  this  movement’s  Schleitheim Confession.  The  Hutterites,  Mennonites,  and  Amish  are  all  offshoots  of  this  religious  movement.  For ten  points,  name  this  Christian  movement  from  the  Radical  Reformation  and  associated  with  Thomas Muntzer, that opposed performing a certain water based sacrament on infants.	ANSWER: Anabaptism(acceptAnabaptists, do not accept or prompt on Baptists or similar answers) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Playoff Packet 1
This leader was opposed by “Jafari the Brainless” and the Rashidian brothers. This leader resigned after his Minister of War nomination was blocked, prompting the leftist Tudeh Party to take to the streets. Kermit Roosevelt helped disseminatefirmandeclarations opposing this leader. MI6 and the CIA joined forces to overthrow this leader in Operation Ajax after he nationalized the AIOC. For ten points, name this secular Prime Minister of Iran who was overthrown in a 1953 coup.	ANSWER: Mohammad Mossadegh
This song plays over the opening credits of Stanley Kubrick’s filmPaths of Glory. The lyrics to this song implore, “Let’s march, let’s march,” and it opens with the words “Arise, children of the fatherland.” Phrases  from  this  song  and  “God  Save  the  Tsar”  are  repeatedly  used  to  represent  opposing  armies  in Tchaikovsky’s1812  Overture.  Patrons  of  Rick’s  American  Cafe  sing  this  song  to  drown  out  the  Nazi soldiers in the filmCasablanca. For ten points, name this national anthem of France.	ANSWER: La Marseillaise(prompt on descriptions of the French national anthem)
A bust of this man in “Severe style” is considered the “first true portrait of an individual European.” In one plot, this man fled Greece after being implicated as a co-conspirator with the treasonous Pausanias. This general at Marathon was elected archon and called for increased emphasis on his city’s naval power, which proved instrumental at a 470 BC battle against the forces of Xerxes the Great. For ten points, name this leader of Greek forces against the Persians at the Battle of Salamis.	ANSWER:Themistocles
In the aftermath of this event, Robert Hunter wrote, “One way or another, this darkness got to give” for the track “New Speedway Boogie.” During this event, Paul Kanter sarcastically thanked security for smashing “Marty Balin in the face.” A video crew recorded a stabbing during this event, footage of which was used in the documentaryGimme  Shelter. The Hells Angels provided security for the Rolling Stones at, for ten points, what failed “Woodstock of the West,” a 1969 free concert in California?	ANSWER: AltamontFree Concert (acceptAltamontSpeedway Free Festival, acceptAltamontAffair)
Hap  Arnold  was  among  the  founders  of  this  company,  which  was  created  partly  out  of  fear  that SCADTA could provide control of the area around the Panama Canal Zone to Germans. In a 1977 tragedy on Tenerife, a Dutch owned vehicle operated by KLM collided with one owned by this company. Beginning in  1960,  this  airline  operated  out  of  the  Worldport  terminal  at  JFK.  For  ten  points,  name  this  airline which, prior to its collapse in 1991, was the largest airline in the United States.	ANSWER:PanAmerican (World) Airways Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Playoff Packet 1
This man was the target of a Russian propaganda film called “The Godfather,” which detailed the mysterious disappearance of opposition leader Viktar Hanchar. This leader was subjected to a EU travel ban  after  he  evicted  diplomats  whose  homes  he  seized  in  the  Drazdy  Conflict.  The  Jeans,  or  Denim Revolution  failed  to  depose  this  leader  after  he  won  the  third  of  his  five  terms.  This  leader  has  been dubbed the “last dictator of Europe” thanks to his two decade long rule from Minsk. For ten points, name this president of Belarus.	ANSWER: Alexander Lukashenko
This newspaper was the first to publish the complete text of the Watergate tapes. This newspaper’s mid-20th  century  conservative  leanings  were  encouraged  by  editor  Robert  McCormick,  who  coined  its motto  “An  American  Paper  for  Americans”.  After  winning  a  national  design  competition,  Howells  and Hood  designed  this  newspaper’s  neo-Gothic  headquarters  in  1911.  The  acronym  WGN,  or  “World’s Greatest Newspaper”, was coined in honor of this newspaper, whose parent company was briefly renamed to Tronc in 2016. For ten points, name this Midwestern daily newspaper.	ANSWER:Chicago Tribune
One holder of this position took out controversial ads against Richard Riordan during primaries and was widely blamed for the bankruptcy of PG&E. An Armenian holder of this title helped remove Rose Bird as state Chief Justice and came to power as the beneficiary of the Bradley Effect. Another holder of this position defeated Neel Kashkari in 2014 and endorsed Gavin Newsom as his successor. For 10 points, name this gubernatorial office held by Gray Davis, George Deukmejian, and Jerry Brown.	ANSWER: GovernorofCalifornia
Anne McAneney was the only female player of this instrument in an October 2018 analysis of 22 of the world’s top orchestras. These instruments don’t play in the second movement of the secondBrandenburg Concertobecause the natural version of this instrument couldn’t play in a minor key. This instrument was vastly improved in the late 18th century by Anton Weidinger’s addition of keys; those keys were replaced with valves in the early 19th century. For ten points, name this highest brass instrument in the standard orchestra.	ANSWER: trumpet
The name of this group was coined by George Poindexter that called them the “reservoir of all the petty  slanders  which  find  a  place  in  the  most  degraded  places  in  the  Union.”  A  formal  “parlor”  was replaced by this group after John Berrien and Samuel Ingram were fired. The leader of this group added Roger Taney and Martin Van Buren to it after purging supporters of John C. Calhoun. For ten points, name this group of informal advisers to Andrew Jackson.	ANSWER: KitchenCabinet Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 3
This site was first named during an expedition led by Jim Savage and Lafayette Brunell, who had run into a group of particularly aggressive Ahwahneechee natives. The Wawona native settlement in this park later became known as Mariposa Grove for its giant sequoias. This site became a national park after Theodore Roosevelt visited Glacier Point. Ansel Adams became famous after his Monolith photograph of this park’s Half Dome. For ten points, identify this national park in northern California’s Sierra Nevada.	ANSWER: YosemiteNational Park
Manuele Fieschi wrote a letter detailing the fate of a king with this name, who was imprisoned by Thomas Berkeley and may have been killed by a group including Thomas Gurney with a red hot poker. Another king of this name was the son of Isabella of France and defaulted on a massive loan from Florence, yet was still able to led his army and win at Cr ́ecy. That king of this name fought France with his son, the Black Prince. For ten points, give this name of English kings, including one who began the Hundred Years’ War.	ANSWER: Edward(acceptEdwardII orEdwardIII)
George Eayre led an attack along the Smoky Hill River that preceded this event. This event was led by a man who had earlier looted an enemy baggage train at Johnsons Ranch during the Battle of Glorieta Pass. Silas Soule was murdered for testifying against the perpetrators of this event. Victims of this event had earlier traveled with Edward Wynkoop to Fort Lyon, where they were instructed to wave a white flag to dissuade violence. Black Kettle and hundreds of his tribesmen were murdered by troops under John Chivington in this event. For ten points, name this 1864 massacre of Cheyenne Indians in Colorado.	ANSWER:SandCreekMassacre (acceptChivingtonMassacre)
At  Hindu  weddings,  the  practice  of  saptapadi  involves  taking  an  oath  near  one  of  these  things.  In Jewish tradition, one of these things is known as ner tamid and is kept in the synagogue at all times. The Buddha gave a sermon named for one of these things from the Gayasisa Hill. In Zoroastrianism, temples are devoted to a “holy” form of this substance called atar. For ten points, name this substance, of which Agni is the Hindu god and which some dragons can breathe.	ANSWER: holy fire(prompt on “lamp”; prompt on “light”)
William Hicks was sent on an expedition to fight this man, though he lost at the Battle of El Obeid. This man lived on Aba Island with his followers, where he won a victory which he compared to the Battle of Badr. The River Column was sent to relieve a general besieged by this leader, and later this man’s forces were raked down by Herbert Kitchener’s expedition at the Battle of Omdurman. For ten points, name this “Guided One”, a Muslim who was proclaimed to be a messianic redeemer in a namesake Sudanese revolt.	ANSWER: Mahdi(or MuhammadAhmadbin Abd Allah) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 3
This organization’s creation was built on a “risk theory” that its rival would allow it to become a superpower rather than risk a pitched battle. This organization was expanded under three Novelles, the first  of  which  ordered  the  creation  of  four  Nassau  class  ships.  This  force  was  expanded  by  Alfred  von Tirpitz, which responded to the Great Britain’s Dreadnought with an arms race prior to WWI. For ten points, name this naval force that was expanded greatly under Wilhelm II.	ANSWER: Imperial Germannavy(prompt on partial answers, like “the Navy” or “the armed forces of Germany”)
During  this  event,  George  Clinton  led  a  crowd  that  congregated  at  Murray’s  Wharf  and  escorted a  man  to  3  Cherry  Street.  A  participant  in  this  event  was  forced  to  walk  to  Franklin  House  after  an overwhelming number of people in the street blocked his carriage. During this event, Robert Livingston exclaimed “long live [its subject]!” after administering the oath of office. For ten points, name this 1789 event in which America’s first President was sworn in.	ANSWER: George Washington’sfirstinauguration(”first” not needed after “1789” is read)
One member of this family founded a firm calledSerpthat sold historic music recordings, including themes from Nazi marches; that member of this family controversially claimed that “Jewish organizations” financially controlled Jacques Chirac. In 2017, a member of this family came second to the leader of the En Marche!party, Emmanuel Macron. The far-right National Front is led by a member of, for ten points, what French political family whose members include Jean-Marie and Marine?	ANSWER: LePenfamily
Members  of  this  group  were  interviewed  forThe  Place  That  Was  Promised,  which  argues  that  its members  weren’t  abnormal  but  rather  lived  average  lives.  Shoko  Asahara  founded  this  group,  whose members killed eight people in the Matsumoto incident. A year later, members of this group wrapped bags of  liquid  with  newspaper,  then  punctured  them  with  sharpened  umbrella  tips  to  spread  a  deadly  nerve agent. For ten points, name this Japanese cult that, in 1995, released sarin gas on the Tokyo subway.	ANSWER:AumShinrikyo(orOumuShinrikyo; acceptAleph)
After being disappointed to find out that Hawikuh was not in fact one of these places, an explorer wrote that its residents “worship water” because it “makes corn grow.” A slave named Estevanico helped popularize  the  legend  of  these  places,  which  he  and  Cabeza  de  Vaca  allegedly  heard  about  during  the Narvaez  Expedition.  Quivira  was  found  not  to  be  one  of  these  places  by  a  man  who  led  an  expedition that marked the first European sighting of the Colorado River. Francisco Coronado searched for, for ten points, what series of cities that were alleged to contain vast quantities of gold?	ANSWER: SevenCitiesofCibola(acceptSevenCitiesofGold; prompt on partial answers) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 3
Mandatory, secular, and free education were established in a set of laws named for one prime minister in this government, Jules Ferry. One crisis faced by this government failed to be resolved by L ́eon Blum’s Popular Front. This government was threatened by Georges Boulanger’s revanchism for a province lost at this  government’s  founding.  Its  first  president,  Adolphe  Thiers,  put  down  the  Paris  Commune.  For  ten points, name this French government that lasted from the Franco-Prussian War to the Second World War.	ANSWER: French ThirdRepublic(prompt on France, prompt on French Republic)
The Burmese saung is often thought to be the only surviving type of this instrument from Asia. A sonata for flute, violin, and this instrument was written by Claude Debussy, who wrote a glissando for it after the flute solo inPrelude  to  the  Afternoon  of  a  Faun. High King Brian Boru supposedly owned one of these instruments depicted on the flag of the Province of Leinster. For ten points, name this plucked string instrument whose concert version has seven pedals and whose Celtic version is found on the Irish coat of arms.	ANSWER: harp
This  policy  included  the  financing  of  the  filmGreetings,  Friends,  which  combined  animation  with live-action  takes  of  cityscapes.  As  part  of  this  policy,  Nelson  Rockefeller  became  the  first  leader  of  the OCIAA. This policy was supported by the non-interventionist stance of Secretary of State Cordell Hull. This policy included the termination of the Platt Amendment as well as the withdrawal of U.S. occupying forces from Haiti. For ten points, name this policy of FDR towards Latin America.	ANSWER: GoodNeighborPolicy
This man accused the East India Company of the destruction of “monuments of real kings” in the Carnatic  region  and  other  abuses  in  his  speechThe  Nabob  of  Arcot’s  Debts.  This  man’s  most  famous work, a response to the sermonA  Discourse  on  the  Love  of  Our  Countryby Richard Price, claims that Jacques Necker was an “Able financier” and finds that the “improvements of the National Assembly are superficial.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  conservative  thinker  who  wroteReflections  on  the  Revolution  in France.	ANSWER: Edmund Burke
A  representative  of  people  in  this  profession  named  Robert  Poli  was  found  to  be  in  contempt  of court.  Richard  Sharpe  claimed  that  the  sitting  president  was  “laying  down  a  marker”  by  opposing  the actions  of  people  in  this  profession.  After  people  in  this  profession  escalated  beyond  “slowdowns,”  the president called their actions a “peril to national security.” Transportation Secretary Drew Lewis made contingency plans after people in this profession struck under their union, PATCO. For ten points, over 11,000 people in what profession were fired by Ronald Reagan in 1981?	ANSWER: airtrafficcontrollers Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 3
Murray Rothbart called this man’smagnum  opusthe “greatest work of libertarian philosophy ever written.” Margaret Thatcher’s proclamation that “There Is No Alternative” derives from this man’s work. This author’s attempts to introduce Lamarckism to sociology were opposed by the American Sociological Association.  In  a  dissent,  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  Jr.  proclaimed  that  “The  14th  Amendment  does  not enact” this person’s most famous work. For ten points, name this Victorian political theorist and author ofSocial Staticswho coined the term “survival of the fittest.”	ANSWER: Herbert Spencer
A cult located on Mount Soracte engaged in practices similar to those practiced on this day. During this celebration, two youths would be taken to an altar to have blood smeared on their foreheads, after which they were expected to laugh. Mark Antony crowned Caesar during this festival in 44 BC. Young men and women were paired off in a fertility lottery during this festival, which landed on February 15th. For ten points, name this ancient Roman pastoral festival whose name derives from the Latin word for “wolf.”	ANSWER: Lupercalia(prompt on February 15th before mentioned)
This  country’s  military  received  an  outpouring  of  foreign  aid  in  the  Building  Partner  Capacity program. This country was the site of the Anbar offensive, which contained Operation Breaking Terrorism and the capture of Ramadi. After participating in a battle in the Sinjar Mountains to aid fleeing Yazidis, the Peshmerga of Massoud Barzani’s Kurdistan are currently working with this country’s troops to defeat ISIS. For ten points, name this country, site of the ongoing battle of Mosul.	ANSWER: Iraq
While this city was led for two decades by mayor Sharpe James, crime rates rose along the highly polluted Passaic River. James was the co-subject of the documentaryStreet  Fightwith his successor as mayor of this city, a man who took over Frank Lautenberg’s Senate seat in 2013. In 2010, Mark Zuckerberg made a $100 million donation to this city’s public school system. For ten points, name this city in New Jersey once led by current Senator Cory Booker.	ANSWER: Newark
This man notes how he “will miss the battles and the wars” after thanking a man called “Coop” for “standing side by side.” In that speech, this man appreciated the support of “the Commissioner, David Stern,” and after affirming that his wife Cookie had “no problem,” he pledged “I plan on going on living for a long time.” Despite giving that retirement speech, this man was later able to play on the 1992 Dream Team with longtime rival Larry Bird. For ten points, name this Los Angeles Laker who, on November 7, 1991, announced his immediate retirement due to HIV.	ANSWER: Earvin “Magic” JohnsonJr. Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 3
This  colony  was  the  site  of  the  Battle  of  Ocho  Rios,  which  reaffirmed  its  British  seizure  from  the Spanish  under  the  expedition  of  Robert  Venables.  In  this  colony,  Samuel  Sharpe  led  a  slave  rebellion on  Christmas  Day  sometimes  called  the  Baptist  War.  Other  uprisings  in  this  colony  culminated  in  two Maroon  Wars  and  the  Morant  Bay  Rebellion.  The  pirate  haven  of  Port  Royal  was  located  in,  for  ten points, what Caribbean island whose capital was moved by the British from Spanish Town to Kingston?	ANSWER: Jamaica
The failed Wagner-Rogers Bill attempted to help 20,000 children during this event. Josiah E. Dubois authored  the  “Report  to  the  Secretary  on  the  Acquiescence  of  This  Government  in”  this  event,  which attacked the State Department’s apathy toward it. The War Refugee Board rescued thousands of victims of this event, though Cuba and the United States refused entry to 900 people fleeing this event aboard the SSSaint Louis. For ten points, name this event that was more or less neglected by FDR’s administration until US troops started liberating concentration camps.	ANSWER: The Holocaust(orShoah)
Gerhard  Ertl  won  the  2007  Nobel  prize  for  discovering  that  the  rate  limiting  step  of  this  process is  the  cleavage  of  a  triple  bond  catalyzed  by  iron.  The  discovery  of  this  process  rendered  the  Allied trade  blockade  of  Chilean  saltpeter  ineffective.  This  process  involves  removing  its  product,  compelling this reaction to continue in a textbook example of Le Chˆatelier’s principle. Most of the world’s fertilizer is  produced  via,  for  ten  points,  what  industrial  process  that  uses  hydrogen  and  nitrogen  to  synthesize ammonia.	ANSWER:Haber-Bosch process
A leader of this movement later founded the Union Movement, advocating the “Europe a Nation” Policy. Supporters of this movement organized an October 1936 march that was met by protesters and the Metropolitan Police; over 100 people were injured in the ensuing Battle of Cable Street. This movement represented “action through unity” with its Flash and Circle. For ten points, name this political movement that, in London, was led by Oswald Mosley, whose followers wore black shirts as inspired by Mussolini.	ANSWER:  British fascism(acceptBritishUnionofFascistsorBUF;  accept  anything  to  do  with fascismin England; prompt on descriptions of pro-Nazi politics or sympathy)
After a victory, this commander called his enemy “an obstinate old ass bent upon her ruin.” Late in life, this man emancipated the slaves that he had kept at his family home of Traveller’s Rest. An aide to this commander, John Armstrong, authored a letter that was circulated in the Newburgh Conspiracy, and his appointment as President of the Board of War touched off the Conway Cabal. For ten points, name this Revolutionary War general who lost the Battle of Camden but earlier won the Battle of Saratoga.	ANSWER: HoratioGates Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 3
One  district  in  this  city  was  dubbed  “Electric  Town”  for  its  booming  black  market.  Six  island fortresses were built on the artificial island of Odaiba in this city, which may be reached through Rainbow Bridge. In 1960 in this city’s Hibiya Hall, a nationalist stabbed a socialist politician on live TV; that hall is in this city’s Chiyoda ward. For ten points, name this city where Frank Lloyd Wright’s Imperial Hotel survived the 1923 Great Kanto earthquake.	ANSWER: Tokyo
This  sort  of  event  is  the  subject  of  the  “Saga  of  the  Seven  Suns”  in  the  Pali  Canon,  in  which  it is  associated  with  the  Maitreya  Buddha  in  a  belief  that  inspired  the  White  Lotus  Rebellion.  A  battle between the forces of Necho II and King Josiah which led to the vassalization of Judah may have inspired one term for this type of event, as possibly did an earlier battle in which Thutmose III defeated the King of  Kadesh  at  the  same  site.  In  2011,  Harold  Camping  planned  for,  for  ten  points,  what  oft-predicted eschatological event described in the Book of Revelation as “Armageddon”?	ANSWER: EndoftheWorld(acceptArmageddonbefore  mentioned;  acceptApocalypse;  accept equivalent descriptions like theLastDays)
One candidate for the Democratic nomination in this election year was a New Jersey senator who had played for the New York Knicks. The South Carolina primary in this year was won by a “compassionate conservative.” This election was the last in which the Green Party nominated Ralph Nader for president; he  was  accused  of  causing  a  spoiler  effect  in  this  year.  This  election  saw  “hanging  chads”  cause  a  long recount in Florida ended by the Supreme Court. For ten points, name this election in which George W. Bush defeated Al Gore.	ANSWER: Election of 2000
Infighting within this state led to the Battle of Bogesund, in which one side’s leader perished on the frozen Lake Malaren. This state faced a rebellion by Erik Puke, who attempted to fulfill the goals of the earlier Engelbrekt rebellion. The second ruler of this state was Eric of Pomerania; his predecessor defeated Albrecht of Mecklenberg to form this state. A bloodbath caused by the Archbishop of Uppsala, along with the coronation of Gustav I of Sweden, greatly weakened this state, which was founded by Margaret I of Denmark. For ten points, name this medieval union of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark.	ANSWER: KalmarUnion
These  people  wrote  their  own  interpretation  of  the  story  of  Jesus  in  an  epic  poem  known  as  the Heliand. 4,500 of these people were beheaded in the Massacre of Verden during their namesake wars, in which Charlemagne attempted to subjugate them and convert them to Christianity. Widukind of Corvey wrote  a  history  of  a  dynasty  named  after  these  people,  who  established  kingdoms  such  as  Sussex  and Wessex. For ten points, name these Germanic people who, with the Angles, ruled pre-Norman England.	ANSWER: Saxons(do not accept or prompt on Anglo-Saxons) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 13
Prior  to  this  battle,  Tychaeus’s  cavalry  provided  reinforcements,  but  fled  during  the  fighting.  A bloody  stalemate  at  this  battle  was  broken  by  the  return  of  forces  under  Gaius  Laelius  and  Masinissa. The victor’s plans for this battle were opposed in the Senate by Fabius Maximus. The loser had earlier defeated  Gaius  Flaminius  at  Trasimene  and  Paullus  and  Varro  at  Cannae.  For  ten  points,  name  this victory by Scipio Africanus over Hannibal, the final battle of the Second Punic War.	ANSWER: Battle of Zama
This figure is the alphabetically-prior namesake of a manifesto that inspired the Pugwash anti-WMD conference; that manifesto is named after this man and Bertrand Russell. David Ben-Gurion tried to make this man the first President of Israel, a post he refused. With Leo Szilard[zee-LAR], this scientist wrote a letter to FDR that inspired the Manhattan Project. For ten points, name this scientist who formulated general and special relativity.	ANSWER: AlbertEinstein
This war was prompted by the death of John Sassamon, and its northern front was called the First Abenaki  War.  Josiah  Winslow  led  the  victorious  forces  in  one  of  this  war’s  battles,  the  Great  Swamp Fight. Mary Rowlandson wrote her captivity narrative about this war which was ended by the Treaty of Casco  Bay.  This  war,  which  destroyed  the  Narragansett,  was  named  for  the  son  of  Massasoit  who  had sheltered the Pilgrims 50 years earlier. For ten points, name this war in which the New England colonies defeated a namesake Native American leader.	ANSWER: King Philip’sWar (orMetacomet’s War; accept equivalents like “rebellion” for war)
One composer from this country wrote a series of nine suites that fuse Bach-style Baroque harmonies to  this  nation’s  folk  music.  A  drought-stricken  ranch  in  this  nation’ssert ̃aois  the  setting  of  Glauber Rocha’s filmBlack God, White Devil, a landmark film in a movement inspired from across the Atlantic by French New Wave called Cinema Novo. Heitor Villa-Lobos is the foremost composer of this country’s classical style. For ten points, name this country whose government hired Lucio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer to plan a new capital city, replacing Rio de Janeiro.	ANSWER: Brazil
The prices charged by these companies were the subject of Regulation Q. In the 1980s and early 90s, a “crisis” caused over a thousand of one variant of these companies to fail. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act repealed one law that mandated separation of two types of these companies; that law, the Glass-Steagall Act, separated their “commercial” and “investment” types. For ten points, name these financial companies that were bailed out in the 2008 financial crisis, modern examples of which include JPMorganChase and Citigroup.	ANSWER: banks  (accept  types  of  banks  like  investmentbanks,  commercialbanks,  etc.;  prompt on  “financial  services”  and  other  generic  answers;  prompt  on  other  types  of  financial  companies  like “Insurance,” “Brokers,” etc.) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Round 13
The last colonial mayor of New York City, David Matthews, was accused of kidnapping a  politician  with  this  surname  who,  alongside William Smith,  Jr.  and  John  Morin  Scott,  was part of "The Triumvirate." The first governor of New Jersey had this surname, as did a man who  drafted  the  Declaration  of  Independence  alongside  Jefferson,  Franklin,  Adams,  and Sherman. That politician with this surname worked with Robert Fulton on the first steamboat from Clermont Manor. For ten points, give this surname of "The Chancellor" who negotiated the Louisiana Purchase as Minister to France.	ANSWER: Livingston (accept Robert R(obert) Livingston; accept William Livingston)
In  a  public  lecture,  this  man  erroneously  called  Mario  Vargas  Llosa  [[YOH-sah]]  a "Colombian  Nobel  Laureate"  despite  neither  designation  being  correct.  This  man's  wife, Marta Sahagún [sah-hah-GOON]], was outed for diverting public lottery funds to her private charity. This man, who called Donald Trump's proposed border wall a "Racist Monument" on Twitter,  faced  controversy  for  calling  his  opponent,  Francisco  Labastida,  a  "crossdresser." The sixty-year dominance of the PRI party was broken by, for ten points, what winner of the 2000 Mexican presidential election and leader of the National Action Party?	ANSWER: Vicente Fox Quesada
St.  Lubinus  names  a  vestigial  chapel  below  the  ground  of  a  building  in  this  city,  a predecessor  of  which  was  destroyed  by  Danish  pirates.  Cnut  the  Great  helped  fund  the construction of a building in this city overseen by Bishop Fulbert. Henry Adams wrote about a building in this city containing over 170 stained glass windows. That building in this city, south of Paris, contains an early instance of the Flamboyant style and the external use of flying buttresses. For ten points, name this French city which is home to a noted namesake Gothic cathedral which contains the Black Madonna.	ANSWER: Chartres [[SHART-ruh]] (accept Chartres Cathedral; accept Cathedral of Our Lady of Chartres)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 15
This event's instigator claimed, “The time is now, the fifth month when the rain falls.” Contrary to myth, only the main hall was set aflame during this event, plans for which were announced at a renga poetry session. Mori Ranmaru dutifully carried out the instructions of one figure involved in this event, the instigator of which was killed while fleeing the Battle of Yamazaki. This event was carried out by Akechi Mitsuhide, who was subsequently defeated by Toyotomi Hideyoshi. For ten points, name this incident in which the first "Great Unifier" of Japan was killed.	ANSWER: Death of Oda Nobunaga (accept either underlined portion of the name; accept Honnoji Incident; or Honno-ji no Hen; accept killing, or assassination, or suicide, or seppuku, or harakiri in place of death; prompt on partial answers; Editor's Note: Though Oda's death was a suicide via seppuku, it is often considered an "assassination")
This work notes that the arrival of refugees in Europe led to a “great shock." "Reflections on the Hungarian Revolution” are included in the fourteenth chapter of this work, which is divided into essays including “Imperialism” and "Antisemitism.” The central concept  of  this  work is contrasted  with despotism  and  tyranny  in  that  the aforementioned systems limit terror to political dissidents only. For ten points, name this first major book by Hannah Arendt, which examines a form of government associated with Nazism and Stalinism.	ANSWER: The Origins of Totalitarianism
This  pitcher  had  a  perfect  game  in  which  the  opposing  pitcher,  Bob  Hendley,  only allowed one hit. Nolan Ryan’s 383-strikeout season  surpassed  the  previous  record held  by this man, who made a decision that resulted in Don Drysdale pitching the opening game of the  1965  World  Series.  That  event  prompted  a  remark  during  a  Heritage  Month  event  in which Barack Obama noted his own inability to pitch. This man sat out the first game of that World Series in observance of Yom Kippur. For ten points, name this legendary left-handed pitcher for the Dodgers nicknamed “Sandy.”	ANSWER: Sandy Koufax (or Sanford Koufax; accept Sanford Braun)
One figure at this battle was killed while slashing his sword and yelling, “Surrender, you traitors!” The Illinois Monument formed the basis of the National Park at this battlefield. Cheatham Hill was the site of a bloody charge led by George Thomas during this battle which was won by Joseph Johnston's forces who were set up around Rocky Face Ridge. Occurring during William Tecumseh Sherman’s Atlanta campaign, this battle inspired the name of the first MLB commissioner. For ten points, name this Civil War battle fought around a namesake northern Georgia mountain.	ANSWER: Battle of Kennesaw Mountain (prompt on "Kennesaw" Mountain Landis)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 15
The orator of this speech claimed, “Never has a lawyer had to practice his profession under such difficult conditions.” This speech asks, “What law and what justice?” and notes that its speaker has been held in solitary confinement for a period of 76 days. Delivered in 1953,  this  oration's speaker  was  a  member  of  the  Orthodox  Party  and  was charged  for  his part in a raid on the Moncada Barracks in an attempt to overthrow Fulgencio Batista. For ten points, name this speech by Fidel Castro claiming that future generations would forgive him.	ANSWER: History Will Absolve Me speech (or La historia me absolverá; accept "History will definitely tell it all"; or "historia definitivamente va a revelar todo"; prompt on descriptions of Castro's 1953 speech)
General  Gilbert  Diendéré  led  a  failed  2015  coup  in  this  country,  where  Christophe Dabiré [[dah-bee-REH]] resigned as prime minister in December 2021. After January 2022, this country was led by members of the Patriotic Movement for Safeguard and Restoration, whose actions led to this country being suspended from ECOWAS. For ten points, name this West African country where President Roch Kaboré of the People's Movement for Progress was ousted in a coup led by Colonel Paul-Henri Damiba in Ouagadougou.	ANSWER: Burkina Faso
In an epic poem involving members of this ethnic group, a cyclops-like figure named Goggle-Eye  is  born  to  a peri spirit  and  a  human  father.  That  work  about  this  ethnic  group focuses on a soothsayer and storyteller given a title translating to “Grandfather.” The Book of Dede Korkut is a work focusing on members of this ethnic group, which ruled an empire that produced the Book of Government. That book was written by the Persian vizier Nizam al-Mulk, who was employed by a member of this ethnic group named Alp Arslan. For ten points, name this ethnic group of the Oghuz and Seljuks.	ANSWER: Turks (accept Turkic; or Turkish; accept Oghuz Turks; accept Seljuq Turks)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl  Bowl Round 15
A   stealthy   deployment   strategy   at   this   battle   was   likened   to   a   "lion   making exceedingly careful preparations to spring on a plucky little mouse." At this battle, fighting at Fox’s Gap involved the participation  of  two  future  U.S.  presidents,  Rutherford  B.  Hayes and  William  McKinley.  This  battle  occurred  near  Boonesboro,  and,  like  a  later  battle, included Union forces benefitting from the discovery of Special Order 191. Occurring three days before the battle of Antietam, for ten points, what was this Union victory in Maryland?	ANSWER: Battle of South Mountain (accept Battle of Boonesboro Gap before “Boonesboro” is mentioned)
In a 1943 work, this man claimed that Jesus’s statement "whoever loses his  life  for my  sake  will  find  it"  would  be  meaningless  in  the  absence  of  an  afterlife.  This  man  once stated, "Man's inclination to injustice makes democracy necessary." This man criticized John Dewey  in Moral Man and Immoral Society and  asked  for  the  ability to “accept the things I cannot change [and the] courage to change the things I can” in a prayer popularized by Alcoholics  Anonymous.  The  Serenity  Prayer  was  written  by,  for  ten  points,  what  U.S. Reformed theologian of German heritage?	ANSWER: Reinhold Niebuhr
The  burial  sites  of  at  least  seven  people  were  unearthed  in  this  mountain  range's Thor's Cave, found  by  the  Manifold  Way.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  the  northern  elements  of  this mountain  range  were  controlled  by  the  Kingdom  of  Rheged.  This  mountain  range’s Peak District  hosts  the  famed  spa  town  of  Buxton,  originally  a  Roman  bath.  The  valleys  of  Aire [[AIR]] and Ribble traverse this mountain range, and the Summit Tunnel was completed in 1841,  allowing  for  rail  traffic  through  this  range  from  Lancashire  to  Yorkshire.  For  ten points, name this mountain range, often described as the "Backbone of England."	ANSWER: Pennines (accept Pennine Range; accept Pennine Chain; accept Pennine Hills)
J. J. LeCain deputized men during this event, which led to the construction of Camp Pilot  Butte.  This  event  included  a  mob  crossing  Bitter  Creek,  an  action  that  Sheriff  Joseph Young  and  territorial  Governor  Francis  Warren  learned  of  after  the  fact.  Thomas  Bayard urged  for  indemnities  after  this  event,  which  was  mocked  in the  Thomas  Nast  cartoon "Here's a Pretty Mess!" Prior to this event, Ah Say asked for railroad tickets for workers of the Union Pacific Railroad. The Knights of Labor held a walkout leading up to, for ten points, what 1885 massacre of Chinese workers in Wyoming?	ANSWER: Rock Springs Massacre (or Rock Springs Riot)  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 6
This man contrasted the lives of the Larkins and O’Neills in a work partly set during the Easter Rising titled Trinity. The village of Gan Dafna is named after a lover of one of this author’s characters thought to be based on Moshe Dayan. That book, which topped the New York Times Best  Seller  List  for  eight  months  in  1958,  was  based  on  a  real  life  incident  in which  a  packet  steamer  bought  by  Haganah  smuggled  a  number  of  immigrants  into Mandatory Palestine. For ten points, name this American author of Exodus.	ANSWER: Leon Uris
This text, which totals only 1100 words, notes how one branch “holds the sword of the community” and another “commands the purse” while a third has “no influence over either.” A central concept in this text is justified by the claim “that the courts were designed to be an intermediate body between the people and the legislature.” Of the 85-article series of  which  this  article  is  a  part,  this  is  the  most  widely  cited  by  the  U.S.  Supreme  Court. Written  by  Alexander  Hamilton  under  the  pseudonym  Publius,  for  ten  points,  what  late Federalist Paper deals with judicial review?	ANSWER: Federalist Paper Number 78 (accept The Judiciary Department before "judicial"; prompt on "Federalist Papers")
The initial phase of this program started with ten years in the cavalry or in service to  a  staff  general.  Sulla  codified  this  program,  whose  first  official  component  required individuals to be 30 years old. Cicero bragged about his ascent to the apex of this program “in his year.” Censor was  the  last  step  in  this  program,  which  began  with  the  office  of quaestor and included time as consul. Open to those of senatorial rank, for ten points, what “ladder of offices” was ascended by ambitious Roman politicians?	ANSWER: Cursus honorum (accept Course of honors; accept Ladder of offices before mentioned)
A  minister  for  this  man  attempted  to  keep  African  Americans  from  entering  the country   and   was   named   Frank   Oliver.   This   man's   faction   opposed Liberal-Unionist conscription.  This  man's  Naval  Service  Act  created  his  country's  navy,  and  his  minister, William  Fielding,  made  a  natural  products  trading  agreement.  A  young  John  Diefenbaker sold   a   newspaper   to   this   leader   in   Saskatoon,   and   this   man   used "sunny   ways"   to compromise with Greenway over the Manitoba Schools Question. Robert Borden succeeded, for ten points, what Liberal leader, the first francophone Canadian prime minister?	ANSWER: Wilfrid Laurier [[low-ree-YEH]]  2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 6
This man married a descendant of King Fernando I, Isabel de Castro. This man was supposed to lead the Revenge Fleet, though ultimately it was his rival, Vasco da Gama, who led it. Four ships under this man's command sank at the Cape of Good Hope. This man, who failed  to  negotiate with  the  Kilwa  Sultanate,  met  the  Tupiniquim  [[too-PIN-ih-kwim]]  and named  the  Island  of  the  True  Cross.  This  man  landed  at  Porto  Seguro  and  subsequently claimed  a  large  South  American  country.  For  ten  points,  name  this  explorer  who  claimed Brazil for Portugal.	ANSWER: Pedro Álvares Cabral
A  sailor  named  Anderson  tried  to  stop  this  man,  causing  him  to  shoot  Anderson  in Quebec  City.  This  man  led  riflemen  in  the  Bee-Line  March,  and  as  the  "Old  Wagoner,"  this teamster was given a near-fatal 500 lashes for striking an officer, boasting that he only got 499. At Saratoga, this man ordered Timothy Murphy to shoot Simon Fraser. Banastre [[BAH- nah-ster]]  Tarleton  was  sent  to  track  this  man  down,  though  this  man  cunningly  placed militiamen at the front with marksmen, causing a double envelopment. For ten points, name this hero at the Battle of Cowpens.	ANSWER: Daniel Morgan   2020-21 National History Bowl - 2021-04-24  Playoff Round 6
At this battle, Congreve rockets fired into American forces caused confusion, leaving Joshua Barney’s flotilla force of African-Americans on its own. Tobias Stansbury dug artillery earthworks on Lowndes Hill during  this  battle.  William  Winder’s  forces  were  defeated  at  this  battle  by  Robert  Ross.  This  battle’s namesake “Races” led to the need for Paul Jennings and Dolley Madison to save a presidential portrait. For ten points, name this 1814 victory for the British in Maryland that led to the burning of Washington, DC.	ANSWER: Battle ofBladensburg
This polity took a more isolationist stance after the battle of Rio Salado, at which the Marinids were defeated. This polity’s last ruler, Boabdil, went into an almost five decade exile in Fes. This polity’s rulers were  named  after  Muhammad  I’s  ancestor,  Nasr  the  Red,  and  “red”  is  the  translation  for  this  polity’s best known work of architecture. This polity was ruled from the Alhambra and ended in 1492 after its conquest by Castile. For ten points, name this polity and city of southern Spain.	ANSWER: Nasrid Emirate ofGranada(accept Nasrid Kingdom ofGranada)
This author wrote a “funeral sermon” that opens, “Weep not, weep not, She is not dead.” This author coined the term “Red Summer” to describe racial violence in 1919. The narrator of a novel by this author tours  Europe  with  a  benefactor  while  playing  ragtime  music,  then  moves  to  New  York  after  viewing  a brutal lynching. This author wrote a poem often considered the “Black National Anthem” that includes, “Lift every voice and sing.” For ten points, name this author of God’s Trombones and Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man.	ANSWER: James WeldonJohnson
This conflict included a surprise raid on Maaten el-Sarra, for which French forces were blamed despite not being involved. The French were, however, participants in this conflict as part of the larger Operation Epervier. Hissene Habre was given Stinger missiles by the US to use in this conflict. This conflict gets its name  from  the  makeshift  “Technicals”  employed  by  FANT  and  FAP  guerrilla  forces  against  Muammar Gaddafi’s army. For ten points, name this war fought over control of the Aouzou Strip by Chad and Libya.	ANSWER: GreatToyotaWar (prompt on the “Chadian-Libyan conflict” or similar answers)
The site of a university created by Benedik Kischdy, this city was captured in 1938 by a country that called it “Kassa.” A pact signed in this city in 1374 allowed a daughter of Louis I to gain the Polish throne upon the death of Casimir the Great. A government formed in this city in 1945 was led by prime ministers Zdenek Fierlinger and Klement Gottwald but only lasted for three years. Located near the eastern Slovak Ore Mountains, for ten points, name this second-largest city of Slovakia.	ANSWER:Kosice[KOSH-it-suh] (acceptKassabefore mentioned) Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Playoff Packet 2
A battle partly named for this cardinal number took place in Henrico County and included a costly victory  by  George  McClellan  against  Joseph  Johnston.  This  number  names  a  series  of  clashes  of  which Daniel Harvey Hill said, “It wasn’t war, it was murder,” after the Battle of Malvern Hill. A battle also called “Fair Oaks” includes this number and occurred a month before a series of battles with this number in which Robert E. Lee drove Union forces away from Richmond. For ten points, name this number of Days and Pines in these 1862 battles.	ANSWER:Seven
Lack  of  government  support  was  to  blame  for  this  battle’s  outcome  according  to  Gary  Bernsten, the head of the CIA’s Jawbreaker team. Tommy Franks was blamed for not sealing off escape routes at this battle, allowing its target to flee to Parachinar. Delta operative Dalton Fury’s account of this battle blames  Pakistan’s  poor  border  security  for  its  result.  For  ten  points,  name  this  December  2001  battle, named for a cave complex in Afghanistan’s White Mountains, that failed to capture a fleeing Osama bin Laden.	ANSWER: Battle ofTora Bora
According  to  legend,  when  this  man  was  killed  in  his  tent  by  a  warrior  named  Brodir,  a  boy  was wounded by the same sword stroke that beheaded this man, but the boy’s wound was immediately healed. This winner at the Battle of Balech Lechta was buried at Armagh after he died in April 1014. That battle was part of a rebellion that started while this man conquered Ulster. For ten points, name this ruler who died at the Battle of Clontarf after ruling for twelve years as High King of Ireland.	ANSWER:BrianBoru  (acceptBrianBorumac  Cennetig,  acceptBrianBoramha,  acceptBrian Boruma)
This film ends with its protagonist relating how, during Roman triumphs, slaves would whisper into a conquerors ear, “That all is fleeting.” That protagonist of this film smiles smugly after another character realizes that the protagonist had arrived in Messina before him as part of the Allied invasion of Sicily. In this film, the protagonist claims, “No bastard ever won a war by dying for his country,” in a speech given to the Third Army. Bernard Montgomery is a rival of the protagonist in, for ten points, what biographical film about a namesake U.S. general?	ANSWER:Patton
The president of this organization’s Chicago branch established the Bethesda Day Nursery. A leader of this organization discussed her “Do Nothing” policy in a speech given to the “White Ribbon Army.” Matilda Carse began this organization’s journal, The Union Signal, and Carrie Nation started one of its chapters. Annie Wittenmeyer was the first president of, for ten points, what women’s organization led by Frances Willard to promote prohibition?	ANSWER:Woman’s Christian Temperance Union(acceptWCTU) Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Playoff Packet 2
This man’s nomination to the Supreme Court resulted in the first public hearing held by the Senate Judiciary  Committee.  His  opinion  inPacker  Corporation  v.  Utahcreated  exceptions  for  free  speech protections when there was a “captive audience”. This man is the alphabetically first author of the article “The Right to Privacy”. This man opposed large trusts and oligarchs in hisOther  People’s  Money  and How  the  Bankers  Use  It.  He  defended  limits  on  women’s  working  hours  in  a  namesake  evidence-filled “Brief” inMuller v. Oregon. For ten points, name this liberal Jewish Supreme Court justice.	ANSWER: Louis Brandeis
Thedore Adorno argued that one of this author’s works was a sweeping commentary which foresaw the terror of Nazi occupation. That work’s protagonist meets the hapless Block after making fun of the title process and is murdered “like a dog.” The Bed, Harrow, and the Inscriber make up the “apparatus” in  another  story  by  this  author,  in  which  the  Officer  die  while  inscribing  the  saying  “Be  Just”  into  his back. Joseph K. was created by, for ten points, what Czech author of the stories “In the Penal Colony” and “The Trial.”	ANSWER: Franz Kafka
Members  of  this  group  in  Poland  were  defeated  at  the  Battle  of  Grotniki.  Some  members  of  this group  were  called  the  “Orphans”  after  the  death  of  a  general  who  won  the  Battle  of  Kutna  Hora,  the one-eyed Jan Zizka, who also defeated two of five crusades against these people. This group was split into radical and moderate factions, the Taborites and Utraquists. A conflict named for this group started after one priest was executed at the Council of Constance. For ten points, name this Bohemian religious group, followers of Jan Hus.	ANSWER: Hussites
At Laurence Olivier’s funeral, an arrangement of a work of this composer by Christopher Palmer was played; that original work was titled for a William Dunbar poem. Paul Hindemith replaced Lionel Tertis to premiere a viola concerto by this composer dedicated to Christabel McLaren. This composer scored a 1944 film adaptation ofHenry V. This composer’sOrb and SceptreandCrown Imperialwere for written the coronations of Elizabeth II and George VI. For ten points, name this composer ofBelshazzar’s Feast.	ANSWER: Sir William Walton
One depiction of this battle shows Asher Crockett saving the life of a cousin of George Washington. The losing side of this battle was following up on false information about an attack on Ninety Six. Adding to a loss at the nearby Battle of King’s Mountain, the this battle’s outcome compelled General Cornwallis to fight the Battle of Guilford Courthouse. For ten points, name this American Revolutionary War battle, a defeat for Banastre Tarleton which took place in a South Carolina town named for its cattle housing.	ANSWER: Battle of Cowpens Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 4
The  Serpent  Column  at  the  Constantinople  Hippodrome  was  originally  from  this  location.  The Omphalos of this location represents the stone that Rhea deceived Cronus into swallowing, and the Greeks considered this city the “navel” of the world. A shrine at this location may have originally been dedicated to Gaia before Apollo killed Python, whose decomposing body put the shrine’s lone female resident into a trance and caused her to recite prophecies. For ten points, the Greek gods spoke to humans through the oracle of what city?	ANSWER: Delphi
Students  in  Jena  demonstrated  in  support  of  this  idea  in  1817  during  the  Vorm ̈arz  period.  A parliament promoting this idea was elected during the 1848 March Revolution and convened in Frankfurt. Supporters  of  this  idea  marched  at  the  Hambach  Festival  and  flew  a  red,  black,  and  gold  flag.  Debate over the “large” and “small” versions of this idea was resolved after the Seven Weeks War when Austria was excluded from this idea. For ten points, name this idea of a unified country whose capital today is in Berlin.	ANSWER: a unified Germany
This scientist’s landmark 1952 paperThe  Education  of  a  Computerwas written for the Remington Rand  corporation,  for  which  this  scientist’s  team  created  the  A-0 [azero]  system  and  its  successors, including  MATH-MATIC  and  FLOW-MATIC.  The  term  “computer  bug”  dates  from  this  scientist’s work  on  the  Mark  II  at  Harvard.  COBOL  was  developed  by  the  students  of,  for  ten  points,  what  rear admiral in the US Navy whose early work on compilers was key in developing human-readable computer programming languages?	ANSWER: Grace Hopper
In 1977, this person became head of the Special Victims Bureau and earlier was appointed Assistant District  Attorney  for  Queens,  leading  to  cries  of  nepotism.  This  politician  ran  on  the  slogan,  “Finally, A  Tough  Democrat”  though  thousands  of  dollars  of  loans  from  John  Zaccaro  were  found  to  be  illegal. Following  a  debate,  Barbara  Bush  derided  this  person  as  a  “witch”.  Ultimately,  this  person’s  running mate only won in Minnesota and the District of Columbia. In 1984, this person ran as the vice presidential candidate with Walter Mondale. The first woman to run for vice president for a major party was, for ten points, which New York Democrat?	ANSWER: Geraldine Ferraro
Ruiz Flores represented this institution during negotiations with interim president Emilio Gil and U.S. ambassador Dwight Morrow. The Calles Law restricted the influence of this organization by invoking Article  130  of  its  country’s  1917  constitution.  Tensions  between  this  organization  and  the  Mexican government  flared  in  the  Cristero  War,  after  which  two  dozen  saints  were  canonized  in  2000.  Graham Greene’s whiskey priest was a member of, for ten points, what largest religious institution in Mexico?	ANSWER: Mexican Roman CatholicChurch Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 4
Alberto Cantino was sent to this empire under the guise of negotiating a horse trade to steal maps of this empire’s overseas discoveries. A desire to settle the “Moluccas issue” prompted this country to sign a 1529 treaty in a neighboring empire. Abu Abdallah Mohammad II’s deposition as Sultan of Morocco prompted  this  empire  to  intervene  in  the  Battle  of  Alcacer  Quibir,  which  brought  an  end  to  its  Aviz Dynasty. For ten points, name this empire that, in 1580, joined Spain in the Iberian Union.	ANSWER: Portugal(or thePortugueseEmpire)
The  “Subordination  in  Historical  Treatment”  speech  was  delivered  by  this  man,  who  reversed  the teachings and advice of Jacky Fisher. This man claimed that colonies were either “outlets for the home products”  or  “nurseries  for  shipping”  in  a  work  that  influenced  McKinley’s  capture  of  Guam  and  the Philippines to use as coaling stations. A hall in the Naval War College is named after, for ten points, what author ofThe Influence of Sea Power upon History?	ANSWER: Alfred ThayerMahan
This man proclaimed that he would appoint Max Roach as Secretary of Defense and Charles Mingus as Secretary of Peace in a satirical 1964 presidential run meant to raise money for SCLC and CORE. This musician avoided the traditional walking bass line in a composition recorded by Sarah Vaughan under the title “Interlude.” During his time in Earl Hines’ band, this composer of “Salt Peanuts” started to develop bebop along with saxophonist Charlie Parker. “A Night In Tunisia” was written by, for ten points, what jazz musician who played a “bent” trumpet?	ANSWER: John Birks “Dizzy” Gillespie
This man’s grandson was murdered 16 years after he set fire to an apartment, killing his grandmother, this  man’s  widow.  This  man  disputed  that  his  father  died  in  a  streetcar  accident,  instead  believing  he was killed by the Black Legion, who had burned down their house. In 1995, this man’s daughter Qubilah admitted  to  a  plot  to  kill  Louis  Farrakhan,  who  she  held  responsible  for  this  man’s  death.  This  man claimed his ancestors had been imposed on by a “blue-eyed devil” when explaining changing his surname to  reflect  his  lost  African  heritage.  For  ten  points,  name  this  man  who  was  assassinated  in  1965  after leaving the Nation of Islam.	ANSWER: MalcolmX(accept MalcolmLittle; accept el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 4
A section of a speech that discusses this symbol claims that the doors to America should be “open to anyone with the will and the heart to get here.” A John F. Kennedy speech about this symbol declared “For of those to whom much is given, much is required.” This symbol was used extensively in campaigning by  Ronald  Reagan,  who  adapted  his  description  from  a  speech  delivered  from  theArbellaby  John Winthrop in 1630. For ten points, name this symbolism that likens America to the “light of the world,” taken from the Sermon on the Mount.	ANSWER: A CityuponaHill
This poet asked “What should we do but sing his praise” in a poem about a ship traveling to the title British colony. This author claimed that Oliver Cromwell “could not cease / In the inglorious arts of peace.” This author of “Bermudas” and “An Horatian Ode” wrote a poem whose speaker declares “I would / Love you ten years before the flood” and who addresses his lover with the line “Had we but world enough and time.” For ten points, name this author of “To His Coy Mistress.”	ANSWER: Andrew Marvell
The  Supreme  Court  case  ofStrauder  v.this  state  held  that  all-white  juries  violated  the  Equal Protection Clause. This state’s first governor, Arthur Boreman, served as President of a convention that created a “Restored Government.” In this state, the home of the “Billion Dollar Coalfield,” coal workers fought against strikebreakers in Logan County in the Battle of Blair Mountain. The Wheeling Conventions effectively  created,  for  ten  points,  what  state  that,  during  the  Civil  War,  broke  away  from  its  eastern counterpart?	ANSWER:WestVirginia
Approximate solutions to this problem can be found using Christofides algorithm, and the Held-Karp algorithm  solves  this  problem  in  “nsquared  times  two  to  then”  time.  Richard  Karp’s  1972  work  on the cycle problem implied that this problem is NP-complete. Merrill Flood was motivated to study this optimization  problem  while  trying  to  determine  optimal  school  bus  routes.  For  ten  points,  name  this famous problem in computer science that, metaphorically, seeks to find the shortest route that visits each city on a certain type of worker’s agenda.	ANSWER: travelingsalesmanproblem
In this event, a crash-landed Zero was captured intact, the first time the Allies had done so. Father John McGrath observed incoming enemy forces from his post on Bathurst Island, but because they were mistakenly thought to be allied, the air raid sirens were not sounded until this event had begun. Chuichi Nagumo led this attack to prevent allied opposition to the Japanese invasions of Timor and Java. Over 200  aircraft  took  part  in,  for  ten  points,  what  February  1942  attack  by  Japanese  forces  on  a  northern Australian city?	ANSWER: bombing ofDarwin(or Battle ofDarwin) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 4
This colony suffered the Plundering Time, which ended shortly before William Stone was appointed governor. The so-called “last battle of the English Civil War” took place in this colony as Captain William Fuller successfully led Commonwealth troops in the Battle of the Severn. This colony, settled by pilgrims aboard theArkandDove, passed a 1649 Toleration Act, despite the Catholic faith of its founders. For ten points, name this colony founded by Cecil Calvert, who had the title of Lord Baltimore.	ANSWER: Province of Maryland
One painting from this movement commemorates the death of the anarchist Angelo Galli during a strike. The manifesto of this movement claims a “roaring car” is more beautiful than theWinged Victory of Samothrace. One member of this movement painted theStates of Mindtrilogy and created the bronze sculptureUnique  Forms  of  Continuity  in  Space.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Italian  art  movement  whose members included Carlo Carr ́a, Filippo Marinetti, and Umberto Boccioni, and which promoted technology while rejecting the past.	ANSWER: Futurism(orFuturismo)
Julia  Avita  Mamaea  served  as  regent  to  the  last  member  of  this  dynasty,  her  son.  The  founder  of this dynasty was born at Leptis Magna and instructed his sons to “be harmonious, enrich the soldiers, and scorn all other men.” The second member of this dynasty killed his brother Geta, built a large bath complex,  and  granted  citizenship  to  all  free  men.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Roman  dynasty  that  ruled from 193 to 235 AD and included Elagabalus, Caracalla, and its founder, Septimius.	ANSWER: SeveranDynasty
A monument in this city, decorated with carvings of azaelas, is found at the foot of Moran Hill and is modeled after the Arc de Triomphe. One building in this city, shaped like a pyramid with three wings, first  topped  out  at  105  floors  in  1992  but  has  yet  to  open  to  the  public.  A  flame-topped  monument  in this city is named after the state ideology. The Ryugyong Hotel is found in, for ten points, what city also home to the Arch of Reunification, the Juche Tower, and Kim Il-Sung Square?	ANSWER:Pyongyang
Early  in  this  battle,  Alfred  Henderson’s  scouts  were  forced  back  from  the  Oscarberg  Hill.  In  this battle, after William Stevenson withdrew from the cattle kraal, John Chard gave the order to assemble a  perimeter  with  cornmeal  bags.  Eleven  Victoria  Crosses  were  awarded  to  the  defenders  of  this  battle, the most a regiment has ever received at one time. For ten points, name this battle in which 140 British troops successfully defended a hospital from an attack by Zulu forces, fought on the same day as the Zulu victory at the Battle of Isandlwana.	ANSWER: Battle of Rorke’sDrift Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 4
At one trial for this crime, Governor Ross Barnett shook hands with the defendant in pointed view of the jury. Five days before this event, its target was nearly run down by a car; a week before that, a Molotov  cocktail  was  thrown  at  his  house.  After  two  all-white  juries  were  deadlocked,  the  perpetrator of this event was finally prosecuted for it in 1994, with his boasting at KKK rallies about shooting the “uppity” victim in the back used as evidence against him. For ten points, name this June 12, 1963 event in which Byron de la Beckwith shot the NAACP’s field secretary for Mississippi.	ANSWER: the assassination(ormurder, etc.) of MedgarEvers
A character in this novel receives a book ofGreat Peacefrom the spirit of an old man with a walking stick. In this book, two friends are turned against each other after a south wind fails to materialize, and one of those men constructs the Stone Sentinel Maze in battle. Three men in this novel agree to becomes brothers  when  they  swear  an  oath  in  a  peach  garden.  This  book’s  climactic  scene  is  the  Battle  of  Red Cliffs. For ten points, name this historical Chinese novel partially named after the states of Wei, Wu, and Shu.	ANSWER: The RomanceoftheThreeKingdoms(orSanGuoYanYi)
With its northern neighbor, this region produces a red pudding named rodgrod. A historic port in this region is home to salt warehouses known as Salzspeicher. The November Constitution attempted to create a joint parliament with this region, bypassing the London Protocol of 1852. A conflict over this region was ended by the Gastein Convention. A group of islands belonging to this present-day region, Heligoland, was swapped with Zanzibar in an 1890 treaty. This region, home to the Hanseatic city of L ̈ubeck, is crossed by the Kiel Canal. For ten points, name this northern German region once contested with Denmark.	ANSWER: Schleswig-Holstein
One of these specific objects named theMichaelis on display at a museum in Bovington. The Lima Locomotive Works was the first factory to produce these objects. A modified type of this vehicle known as a “Crab” was used by “Hobart’s Funnies.” Close to 80 percent of these vehicles, which were lighter than a similar vehicle named for Churchill, were provided by the Lend-Lease program. These vehicles carried a 75-milimeter gun, used in frequent clashes with German Panzers. For ten points, name this medium-sized American tank, named after a Civil War general who led the March to the Sea.	ANSWER: M4 ShermanTank (accept Medium Tank,M4; prompt on tank before mentioned)
One of these pieces, the fifth by its composer, includes an “alla bulgarese” scherzo possibly inspired by its composer’s ethnomusicological studies. One of these pieces also includes tape recordings of Holocaust survivors;  that  piece  is  Steve  Reich’sDifferent  Trains.  A  set  of  variations  on  theDeutschlandliedwas included in a collection of these works dedicated to Count Erdody. Bela Bartok wrote six of, for ten points, what chamber works whose “father” was Joseph Haydn, consisting of two violins, a viola, and a cello?	ANSWER: stringquartets Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 4
This person succeeded Tomas Estrada Palma as Provisional Governor of Cuba, having much earlier served as Benjamin Harrison’s second Solicitor General. This leader replaced Elihu Root as Secretary of War after serving an apprenticeship starting in 1901 as the first civilian U.S. Governor of the Philippines. This man shared the bench with McReynolds, Holmes, Brandeis, and Van Deventer, the last of whom he appointed, when he served as Chief Justice following his time in his highest office. For ten points, name this 24th President of the United States.	ANSWER: William Howard Taft
One  parody  of  this  film  ends  with  an  invitation  to  bask  in  “television’s  warm  glowing  warming glow.”  In  this  film,  Scatman  Crothers’  character  takes  a  surprising  axe  to  the  chest.  Rodney  Ascher’s documentaryRoom 237argues  that  the  distinctive  carpet  pattern  and  Danny  Torrance’s  sweater  both reference this film’s director’s supposed filming of the fakedApollomoon landings. For ten points, name this 1980 Stanley Kubrick film starring Jack Nicholson as a caretaker at the haunted Overlook Hotel.	ANSWER: The Shining
A battleship named for this region provided naval support for the first battle of World War II, the Battle of Westerplatte. The Gastein Convention split control of this region between Prussia and Austria. Its  namesake  Question  led  to  two  wars  named  for  part  of  this  region.  A  canal  in  this  region  connects the Helgoland Bight with the Baltic Sea, and it was incorporated into the German Confederation after its  seizure  from  Denmark.  At  the  base  of  the  Jutland  peninsula  is,  for  ten  points,  what  northernmost modern-day German state, with capital Kiel?	ANSWER: Schleswig-Holstein
This  program’s  Homing  Overlay  Experiment  failed  its  first  three  tests  before  passing  a  probably rigged  fourth  test.  Project  CHECMATE  was  created  to  research  hypervelocity  railguns  for  use  in  this program, which called for the “Brilliant Pebbles,” a system which would have made use of tungsten rods. Ted Kennedy derided this program as a “reckless scheme” and coined its colloquial name. Ronald Reagan proposed,  for  ten  points,  what  defense  system  that  would  have  placed  nuclear  missiles  in  space,  whose nickname references a popular science-fiction film?	ANSWER: StrategicDefenseInitiative(orSDI; acceptStarWars)
In a scandal involved with this program, Trevor Flugge, who was indicted in the Cole Inquiry, claimed to lose his hearing. This program was instituted soon after Kuwait was declared to be Iraq’s 19th province. The Volcker report studied this program, noting that the Australian Wheat Board was getting the most illegal kickbacks from Saddam Hussein. For ten points, name this UN program that was supposed to give Iraqis nourishment in exchange for Iraq’s chief export.	ANSWER: Oil-for-foodprogram Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl V Quarterfinals and JV Semifinals
In his last years, this man served as syndic in what is now St. Charles County, Missouri. This man received the name “Big Turtle” after being captured by Blackfish, a Shawnee leader who besieged a town named for him. As part of a project intended to reach a region named Transylvania, this figure reached Ohio Falls in Louisville after passing near the border of Tennessee and Virginia through a mountain pass. For  ten  points,  name  this  pioneer  who  helped  the  settlement  of  Kentucky  by  creating  the  Wildnerness Road through the Cumberland Gap in the Appalachians.	ANSWER: Daniel Boone
This man captured Witiges and his wife and deposed the short-lived Pope Silverius during his siege of Rome. This man defeated Gelimer ten miles south of Carthage in the Battle of Ad Decimum and later destroyed the Vandal kingdom at the Battle of Tricamarum. According to legend, this man was blinded and was reduced to begging for alms after he fell from favor. Along with an eunuch rival of his, Narses, this man helped to suppress a riot between the Blues and the Greens. The Nika riots were put down by, for ten points, what Byzantine general who served Justinian the Great?	ANSWER: Flavius Belisarius
The title character of this work “won the praise of Queen Elizabeth for the way she handed a bowl of rose water”. In this work, the title character falls in love with Sasha in a “Frost Fair” on the Thames and is assisted by Nick Greene in publishing the poemThe Oak Tree. This “biographical” work is heavily inspired by the family history of Vita Sackville-West, the author’s lover, as it progresses from Elizabethan era  to  modern  times.  For  ten  points,  name  this  1928  novel  whose  title  character,  a  nobleman,  lives  for centuries without aging after changing sex, written by Virginia Woolf.	ANSWER: Orlando, A Biography
The  MacDonald  White  Paper  repudiated  the  goal  set  forth  in  this  document.  Leo  Avery  and Lord Milner are sometimes proposed as authors of this document instead of its namesake, whose prime ministership  saw  the  signing  of  the  Entente  Cordiale.  This  document’s  creation  was  influenced  by  a meeting between its namesake and Chaim Weizmann, in which Uganda was offered as a solution to the “Jewish  Question”.  For  ten  points,  name  this  letter  addressed  to  Walter  Rothschild  by  its  namesake Foreign Secretary that supported a national homeland in Palestine for the Jews.	ANSWER: BalfourDeclaration
Goran Goransson’s improved converter for this process made it more efficient. This procedure was invented almost at the same time as its more common namesake inventor by William Kelly. Before this procedure was invented, a time-consuming process called cementation had to be used. A variation on this process that uses a basic lining to remove phosphorous was developed by Sidney Gilchrist Thomas. This process involves blowing air onto molten iron, thus removing impurities. For ten points, name this process that sharply decreased the cost of steel production.	ANSWER: Bessemerprocess (acceptGilchrist-Thomasprocess before read) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl V Quarterfinals and JV Semifinals
This man’s forces crushed a far larger army at the Battle of Monte Porzio, weakening the Commune of  Rome.  After  divorcing  his  distant  relative  Adelheid  of  Vohburg,  he  gained  Burgundy  by  marrying Beatrice  I.  He  convinced  Geza  to  join  a  campaign  in  which  he  routed  Rum  Seljuk  at  Iconium,  but  he died in an accident at the Saleph River, after which his body was preserved in a barrel of vinegar. For ten points, name this 12th century Holy Roman Emperor who drowned while traveling during the Third Crusade.	ANSWER: FrederickBarbarossa(orFrederickI)
While  a  member  of  this  party,  Jimmy  Reid  gave  a  1971  speech  telling  students  “a  rat  race  is for  rats  –  we’re  not  rats.”  The  last  member  of  this  party  to  hold  political  office  was  Wogan  Philipps, Baron  Milford,  and  Nina  Temple  disbanded  this  party  in  1991.  A  document  addressed  to  this  party’s leadership  was  co-signed  by  Arthur  MacManus  and  printed  by  the  Daily  Mail  shortly  before  the  1924 general election. The forged Zinoviev letter was sent to, for ten points, what pro-Soviet political party in the United Kingdom?	ANSWER: CommunistPartyofGreatBritain(orCPGB; accept answers that indicateCommunist PartyinGreatBritainorEngland, but do not accept “Communist Party of United Kingdom”)
The leader of this event had his followers march to the Sun Inn to demand the release of  a  group  of  prisoners.  Participants  in  this  event  were  pardoned  by  a  president  who described them as being “as ignorant of our language as they were of our laws." A $2 million direct tax to fund the Quasi-War was an immediate cause of this event, during which a group of assessors from Quakertown was targeted. John Adams pardoned the leader of this event, which occurred five years after the similar Whiskey Rebellion. For ten points, what was this 1799 to 1800 farmers’ rebellion in Pennsylvania?	ANSWER: Fries's Rebellion (accept the House Tax Rebellion; accept the Home Tax Rebellion; accept the Heesses-Wasser Uffschtand; prompt on answers denoting a “Revolt of the Pennsylvania Dutch”)
Two years prior to this battle, its victor defeated Murza Begich at the Vorzha River. A number  of  nobles  from  Ryazan  were  possibly  killed  at  this  battle,  to  which  Oleg  II  was crucially late. The kingmaker Mamai led the losing side at this battle and was later killed by Tokhtamysh [[tohk-tah-MISH]]. The victor of this battle was given the epithet “Donskoy" in reference  to  a  river  near  this  battlefield.  For  ten  points,  what  1380  battle  was a  decisive victory for Dmitri, Prince of Moscow over the Golden Horde?	ANSWER: Battle of Kulikovo (prompt on Battle of “Mamaev” or Battle of the “Don”)
A   governor   of   this   region,   named   Abdullahi  Sadiq   [[SAH-deek]], attempted   to influence one country to side with the Central Powers of World War One. That leader of this region was a member of the Harari people and forged an alliance with Mohammed Hassan of the Dervish State. A conference in Dire Dawa contributed to disputes over the name of this region,  where  a  raid  on  an  oil  facility  in  Abole  [[ah-BOH-leh]]  led  to  a  2007  crackdown  by Meles Zenawi’s government. A 1970s war over this region began when Siad Barre’s forces invaded  it from  the  east.  For  ten  points,  name  this  region historically disputed  between Somalia and Ethiopia.	ANSWER: Ogaden (accept Ogaadeen; accept Huwan; accept Soomaali Galbeed prompt on "Somali Region" or “Western Somalia”; prompt on "Haud" or "Ethiopia" or "Abyssinia")
Person and body part required. This body part is described as being “gaily frilled” in a depiction that shows its owner next to a portrayal of a donkey. The owner of this body part was stationed at Naples prior to a battle in which it was hit by an arquebus shot. The loss of functionality in this body part was said to “bring greater glory” to its right counterpart following its injury at a 1571 victory for Don John of Austria and the Holy League. That injury led this body part's owner to be labelled the “Cripple of Lepanto.” For ten points, name this body part belonging to the author of Don Quixote.	ANSWER: Cervantes' Arm (or Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra’s left arm; accept equivalents; prompt on partial answers)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl - 2021-11-30  Bowl Round 16
This place's Dau Go cave contains remnants of sharp wooden columns used to sink Mongol ships. This place was the site of the raising of the flag of a provisional government led by Nguyễn Văn Xuân [[WEHN VAHN ZHU-AHN]]. Legends state that the landscape of this area was formed when guardian dragons spat out jewels and jade to protect against invaders, and that Dragon King's seven-day marriage took place in this area's Thien Cung [[TYEN-KUNG]] cave. For ten points, containing over fifteen hundred limestone karst islands, name this arm of the Gulf of Tonkin that was, along with Haiphong Harbor, heavily mined by the U.S. Navy.	ANSWER: Hạ Long Bay (or Halong Bay; or Vịnh Hạ Long; prompt on “Gulf of Tonkin” prior to mention, do not accept or prompt on Haiphong Harbor)
In  one  work,  this man wrote of studying an “in-between” period of one figure’s life after that figure’s experiences in South Africa. That work by this author is subtitled On  the Origins of Militant Nonviolence. A work by this author, originally planned as a chapter about “emotional crises in late adolescence,” tries to explain an exclamation given at a choir practice in Germany. For ten points, name this psychologist and author of Gandhi’s Truth and Young Man Luther who is best known for coining the phrase “identity crisis.”	ANSWER: Erik Erikson (or Erik Homburger Erikson; accept Erik Salomonsen)
An 1828 poem about one of these people focuses on his relationship with Maria and the revenge of her father, Kochubei. In a novel, one of these people falls in love with Aksinia, who is killed by a stray bullet. The lifestyles of these people in a valley by the title river are depicted  in  the  novel And  Quiet  Flows  the  Don.  A  Tolstoy  novel,  published  in The  Russian Messenger, outlines the protagonist's relationship with one of these people named Eroshka who clashes with the Chechens. For ten points, name these people of the Ukrainian steppes, one of whom titles Lord Byron's Mazeppa.	ANSWER: Cossacks (accept Don Cossack; accept Kozak; prompt on "Zaporizhian" or “Ukrainian” or “Russian”)
The Turner family competed with a company named for this early user of direct mail techniques. This man was inspired by a black material found in Italy to name a factory after the region of Etruria. Early in his career, John Flaxman originally worked under this man, who partnered with Thomas Whieldon. For three years, this man tried to replicate the blue and white  Portland  Vase.  This  producer  of  creamware  created  a  medallion  depicting  a  man  in chains above the words “Am I Not a Man and a Brother?” For ten points, name this English abolitionist who industrialized pottery production.	ANSWER: Josiah Wedgwood (accept Wedgwood pottery; accept Josiah Wedgwood and Sons Ltd.)  2021-22 HS National History Bowl - 2021-11-30  Bowl Round 16
This  book's  author  was  present  for  a  scene  in  this  book,  where  she  witnessed  the pursuit of the Goeben and Breslau at age two. This book's author cited Thomas Mann, to depict the  desires  of  Germany,  in  the  section  "Flames  of  Louvain."  Opening  with  the  funeral  of Edward VII [[the Seventh]], this book observes, “On history’s clock it was sunset, and the sun of the old world was setting in a dying blaze of splendor never to be seen again.” Consisting of the sections “Plans,” “Outbreak,” and “Battle,” for ten points, what Barbara Tuchman book detailed the events of the first month of World War One?	ANSWER: The Guns of August
Journalist  Westbrook  Pegler  wrote  an  article  which  claimed  this  man  must  be reported to the "Missing Person's Bureau" after his RNC presidential nomination. This man's daughter,  Nancy  Kassebaum,  was  the  first  woman  ever  elected  to  a  full  term  in  the  Senate without  her  husband  having  previously  served  in  Congress. In  one  speech,  this  candidate claimed, "The price of economic planning is the loss of economic freedom" in reference to the continuation of FDR's New Deal programs. A landslide loss in the 1936 election was suffered by, for ten points, what Republican candidate and former governor of Kansas?	ANSWER: Alf Landon (or Alfred Mossman Landon)   2021-22 HS National History Bowl - 2021-11-30  Bowl Round 16
At this battle, Sam Houston received a lifelong wound from an enemy arrow. After this battle, John Gordon reported British collaboration with the enemy leading to the capture of Pensacola. Menawa led the losing force of this battle, after which over 23 million acres of land were given to the U.S. in the Treaty of Fort Jackson. This battle in what is today Alabama was fought against the Red Stick Confederacy. For ten points, name this 1814 battle in which Andrew Jackson routed the Creek.	ANSWER: Battle ofHorseshoe Bend
In  this  city  in  1958,  people  who  witnessed  an  argument  between  Majbritt  Morrison  and  her Jamaican  husband  assaulted  Morrison,  an  act  that  resulted  in  a  week-long  race  riot.  After  Stephen Lawrence, a teenaged black youth, was murdered in this city, the Macpherson report denounced this city’s “institutionally racist” police force. Following the passage of the Community Charge, the largest protests against that tax took place in, for ten points, what city where 1958 race riots struck Notting Hill?	ANSWER:London, England, U(nited) K(ingdom)
During this conflict, the Halloween Massacre occurred after a disputed result in the 1992 presidential election. The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale during this war was the largest battle on African soil since World War Two, and Paul Manafort worked to portray UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi favorably during this war. Fidel Castro sent Cuban troops to aid one side in this war, fought between UNITA and Jose dos Santos’s MPLA. For ten points, name this African war fought over a former Portuguese colony.	ANSWER:Angolan CivilWar
An unachieved goal of this program was the creation of over 800,000 housing units under Title III of this  program’s  Housing  Act.  This  program  also  opposed  a  1947  piece  of  legislation  that  this  program’s presidential overseer called a “slave-labor” bill. The settlement of the Lend-Lease program that had been run by the previous president was one of this program’s major goals. Attempting to preserve the agenda of the New Deal, for ten points, name this liberal program outlined by Harry Truman.	ANSWER:Fair Deal
For the grand opening of Lincoln Center, this dancer choreographed the premiere of Samuel Barber’s Antony and Cleopatra. This man, who was mentored by Lester Horton, founded a company that was taken over by Judith Jamison after this man’s death from AIDS. This man’s best-known work was presented at the inaugurations of Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton. Inspired by spirituals, gospel, and blues music, for ten points, name this African-American choreographer of Revelations.	ANSWER: AlvinAiley Page 1  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Playoff Packet 3
A copy of this speech was once smuggled in a basket of women’s underwear so that dissenters could not destroy it before it was read. In order to secure a “grand peace for all the generations,” this speech asked listeners to “[endure] the unendurable and [suffer] what is unsufferable.” This speech marked the first occasion that common citizens heard the voice of their emperor, who signaled a desire to surrender after facing the atom bomb. For ten points, identify this speech given by Hirohito at the end of World War Two.	ANSWER:Jewel VoiceBroadcast (acceptImperial Rescript on the Termination of the Greater East Asia War)
This figure’s daughter, Pearl, wrote her epitaph, “The gem that filled [the casket] sparkles yet.” An 1886  photograph  shows  Blue  Duck  posing  next  to  this  figure.  “Hanging  Judge”  Isaac  Parker  gave  this figure a nine-month prison sentence for stealing a horse. Edgar Watson is among the suspects in the still unsolved 1889 murder of this figure who knew the James and Younger boys while growing up in Missouri. James Reed and Jim July were among the husbands of, for ten points, what outlaw queen of the Wild West?	ANSWER: BelleStarr
This empire was established after the Battle of Ongal by Asparukh of the Dulo clan, who founded its first capital of Pliska. One ruler of this state, Simeon I the Great, established his dominance by defeating Leo  Phocas  at  the  Battle  of  Achelous.  This  state  was  destroyed  after  the  Battle  of  Kleidion  was  won by Basil II, whose epithet comes from blinding 99 out of 100 survivors from this empire’s army. For ten points, name this western neighbor of the Byzantine Empire.	ANSWER: FirstBulgarian Empire
In this city, the Black Recondos were given permission by the police to carry out arrests. Sojourner Truth moved to this city after she escaped from slavery, and Jack Johnson was arrested in this city for violating  the  Mann  Act.  C.  W.  Post  invented  Grape  Nuts  and  founded  a  cereal  company  in  this  city, where W. K. Kellogg also made “corn flakes.” The Race Betterment Foundation was founded in this city by a eugenicist doctor. John Harvey Kellogg founded a sanitarium in, for ten points, what Michigan city?	ANSWER:Battle Creek, Michigan
The similarities between George Downie’s misfortunes in this battle and Horatio Nelson’s fortunes in Egypt led this battle to be known as the “False Nile.” The Saranac River was a key location at this battle, where the flagship of the winning side was the 26-gun USS Saratoga. Thomas MacDonough crushed George Prevost’s troops at this battle. For ten points, name this battle of the War of 1812 in which the British  gave  up  Plattsburgh  in  upstate  New  York,  because  they  lost  control  of  a  lake  on  the  Canadian border.	ANSWER: Battle ofLake Champlain(accept Battle ofPlattsburghbefore mentioned) Page 2  DRAFT NHBB Nationals Bowl 2019-2020Bowl Playoff Packet 3
This  document  called  for  reform  of  the  Democratic  Party  beginning  in  the  South  and  rallied  for universities  to  change  because  they  are  in  a  “permanent  position  of  social  influence”.  This  document notes  that  the  two  ills  of  society  are  nuclear  weapons,  “symbolized  by  the  bomb”  and  the  “Southern struggle against racial bigotry”. It was completed at a UAW retreat, though later, the organization that commissioned this work shifted support to SNCC. Tom Hayden wrote, for ten points, what 1962 Students for Democratic Society manifesto?	ANSWER: PortHuronStatement
In 1686, the Marquis de Denonville tricked and seized 50 Iroquois chiefs, who were sent to Marseille to  become  these  people.  One  infamous  site  to  hold  these  people  was  the  Bagne  of  Toulon,  where  Jean Valjean was sentenced inLes Miserablesto be one of these people. Miguel de Cervantes was kept for five years in Algiers as one of these people, 12,000 of whom were freed at the Battle of Lepanto. Criminals and  prisoners  of  war  were  often  condemned  to  be,  for  ten  points,  what  type  of  laborer  who  rowed Mediterranean warships?	ANSWER: galleyslaves(prompt on a partial answer)
A legend about this site holds that it was created from two boys that turned into boulders after a day of playing in the rain. Bob Hawke falsely promised the Mutitjulu community that this site would not be disturbed. In order to preserve a “Dreamtime Track”, the nearby Anangu tribe asks visitors not to climb this site. This site is alternatively known as Ayers Rock and is held sacred by the nearby Aboriginese. For ten points, identify this large sandstone formation in the Northern Territory of Australia.	ANSWER: Uluru(acceptAyersRockbefore mention)
This man was once approached by a disguised Mircea the Elder, who asked him for peace talks just prior to a disaster at Rovine. The Ulu Cami mosque of Bursa was built by this man to commemorate his victory  over  Western  Europe  during  the  Crusade  of  Nicopolis.  This  man  allegedly  died  by  banging  his head on a cage after he was captured near the city of Cubuk following his defeat at the Battle of Ankara to Tamerlane. For ten points, identify this son of Murad I, an Ottoman sultan named for the speed of his military victories.	ANSWER: BayezidtheThunderbolt(acceptBayezidI)
This man’s workThe Compedium of Revelationswas sent to one pope after he declined to join his Holy League against one invader. This man’s prophecy of a “Cyrus of the North” came true when Charles VIII invaded Italy. In order to cleanse his city of sin, this man organized an event where Boccaccio’s art was burned in the Bonfire of the Vanities. This man came to power after his city ousted the Medici family in 1494. For ten points, identify this Dominican friar who briefly controlled Florence.	ANSWER: Girolamo Savonarola Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 5
In  letters  sent  to  Abbe  Henri  Gregoire  and  Benjamin  Banneker,  this  man  acknowledged  the accomplishments of black people. A dialogue between a “Head” and “Heart” was written by this man and was addressed to Maria Cosway. In his final letter, this politician expressed happiness that “after half a century of experience and prosperity” our “fellow citizens continue to approve the choice we made.” In a response to the Danbury Baptists, this man coined the phrase “wall of separation between church and state.” For ten points, name this Founding Father and author of theDeclaration of Independence.	ANSWER: Thomas Jefferson
The HEAR Act was passed to facilitate this process and was used on two drawings by Egon Schiele. The 1998 Washington Principles set guidelines for this legal process. A 2018 report issued by B ́en`edicte Savoy  and  Felwine  Sarr  recommended  over  70,000  objects  in  the  Mus ́ee  du  Quai  Branly  undergo  this process. Hungary and Poland have been criticized for failing in this process with Jewish-owned artwork confiscated by the Nazis. For ten points, name this process where the rightful owners or their descendants can reclaim stolen artwork.	ANSWER:  art restitution(acceptreturningstolenart,  acceptreturningartthat  the  Nazis  stole from Jews before “B ́en`edicte Savoy,” accept obvious equivalents)
One theoretician in this sect was Attar of Nishapur, who wroteThe Conference of the Birds. Shamil of the Caucasian Imamate was a member of this sect, which includes the Bektashi Order, many of whom are Bosnians. Psychological commentaries made by members of this sect discuss the Nafs, Qalb and Ruh. Schools of this sect include the Naqshbandi and the Senussi, and people in this sect undergo Muraqabah meditation. Schools in this sect include tariqas. People in this sect seek ihsan, or perfection of worship of Allah. For ten points, name this mystic Islamic sect.	ANSWER: Sufism (acceptTasawwuf)
Lucullus McWhorter documented a losing warrior in this war in hisYellow Wolf. One side’s attempted violation of the Treaty of Walla Walla sparked this conflict, in which Poker Joe and Toohoolhoolzote were killed. After fleeing to the Bitterroot Mountains, one side in this war was surprised in an attack at the Big Hole. Arthur Chapman translated the losing commander in this war’s surrender speech, in which he proclaimed that “I will no longer fight”. Looking Glass and Chief Joseph were leaders of the namesake tribe in, for ten points, what 1877 conflict?	ANSWER: NezPerceWar
The first one of these devices was made from strips of gold attached to a plastic triangle. A group of PhD students that left to form Fairchild, which manufactured these devices, were known as the “traitorous eight”. That group split from a company whose founder developed these devices with John Bardeen and Walter  Brittain.  William  Shockley  is  credited  with  developing  these  things.  Created  to  replace  vacuum tubes, for ten points, what semiconductor devices amplify current or act as switches?	ANSWER: transistors Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 5
This meeting affirmed the excommunication of Philip the Amorous of France, who had claimed that his wife Bertha was too fat and scandalously remarried Bertrade of Montfort. This meeting was prompted by Byzantine envoys to the Council of Piacenza earlier the same year. Robert the Monk claimed that the audience erupted into cries of “God wills it!” after a speech at this meeting called for the conquest of the Holy Land. For ten points, name this 1095 ecumenical council at which Urban II roused support for the First Crusade.	ANSWER: Council of Clermont
In  1961  in  this  US  state,  a  love  affair  may  have  incited  a  nuclear  technician  to  pull  a  control  rod, killing  three  people  in  the  SL-1  nuclear  reactor  explosion.  That  reactor  was  part  of  Argonne-West,  a nuclear  research  facility  in  this  state  where,  in  1951,  the  Experimental  Breeder  Reactor-1  lit  four  light bulbs with the first nuclear electricity. The first city powered by nuclear energy was this state’s Arco, just north of Craters of the Moon National Monument. For ten points, name this western US state where the USSNautilus’s reactor was tested in the plain of the Snake River.	ANSWER: Idaho
This man and his brother Charles patented the oscillating steam engine. This man designed a turner that could create bedsteads four times faster than average, but he failed to make a bedstead factory in Yonkers. A company formed by this man sold Hovair systems with the Pomagalski company. At the New York  Crystal  Palace,  this  man  asked  for  a  rope  holding  a  platform  to  be  cut,  demonstrating  a  safety system while he was aboard. For ten points, name this inventor of the “safety elevator” and namesake of the world’s largest elevator company.	ANSWER: Elisha Otis
One war criminal within this regime was a chaplain-turned-Chief Guard earned the epithet “Brother Satan.”  Despite  accusations  that  Archbishop  Aloysius  Stepinac  collaborated  with  this  regime,  he  was named a cardinal in 1952 and beatified after his death. The title ofPoglavnikwas given to the leader of this regime, Ante Pavelic [ahn-taypav-eh-lich]. Inmates at the Jasenovac concentration camp were often killed  with  knives  known  as  “Serbcutters”  under,  for  ten  points,  what  fascist  regime  that  committed genocide in World War II-era Croatia?	ANSWER:Ustase([oos-ta-shuh], but be lenient; acceptUstasha-Croatian Revolutionary Movement)
This  clan  sought  to  remove  Emperor  Antoku  from  power,  eventually  succeeding  with  his  death  at the  Battle  of  Dan-no-ura.  One  of  this  clan’s  leaders  was  defeated  in  the  Heiji  Rebellion  after  revolting against Emperor Go-Shirakawa. This family was succeeded by the Hojo family as the rulers of a certain dynasty,  and  they  fought  their  enemies,  the  Taira  Clan,  during  the  Genpei  War.  Yoritomo  and  the famous swordsman Yoshitsune were members of, for ten points, what clan that established the Kamakura shogunate?	ANSWER: Minamotoclan (or family, etc.) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 5
A site-specific sculpture installed in this country at Gibbs Farm is a horn shaped steel skeleton with fabric stretched over it that runs through a hill. Anish Kapoor’sDismembermentis located in this country, as  was  a  “cardboard”  cathedral  meant  to  replace  a  building  that  was  damaged  in  a  2011  earthquake. Gottfried Lindauer left Bohemia to work in this country, where he painted Paratene Te Manu, a man with distinctive  spiral  facial  tattoos.  For  ten  points,  name  this  country  that  suffered  the  2011  Christchurch earthquake.	ANSWER: NewZealand
This man won over $100 million in a libel lawsuit againstCBSafter they released a documentary entitledThe Uncounted Enemy. A year after the Little Rock Crisis, this man became commander of the 101st Airborne Division. Despite opposition from Nixon, this man supported William Peers’ investigation of the My Lai [meelie] Massacre. This man focused his efforts at the Battle of Khe Sanh after he thought other battles in a concurrent campaign were a distraction. For ten points, name this US commander in Vietnam during the Tet Offensive.	ANSWER: WilliamWestmoreland
At this location, a torpedo attack caused thePalladato keel over during fighting that one side initially thought was part of the celebrations for Admiral Oskar Stark’s wife. Despite that confusion, the surprise attack at this location was only able to disable two battleships, theRetvizanandTsarevich. ThePoltava was sunk at a battle at this location on the southern tip of the Liaodong Peninsula. For ten points, name this Manchurian port that was besieged during the Russo-Japanese War.	ANSWER:PortArthur(acceptRyojun; acceptLushunCity; prompt on Liaodong Peninsula before mentioned; prompt on Manchuria before mentioned)
The original choice to govern this entity was Percy Kirke, but was replaced after his harsh response to  the  Monmouth  Rebellion.  This  entity’s  armed  forces  were  once  led  by  Lieutenant  Governor  Francis Nicholson,  until  he  was  deposed  in  Leisler’s  Rebellion.  A  1684  revolt  that  led  to  the  revocation  of  the Massachusetts Bay Colony’s charter inspired the need for this entity, which was intended to improve royal control under Edmund Andros. For ten points, name this short-lived dominion created by James II that merged colonies like New Hampshire and Maine.	ANSWER: Dominion of NewEngland(in America)
A Hans Traxler cartoon inspired a nickname for this politician translating to “pear.” This man used the Basic Law to call a controversial vote of no confidence that led Karl Carstens to dissolve his country’s parliament.  Francois  Mitterand  and  this  man  were  co-awarded  the  Charlemagne  Award  for  efforts  in unifying  Europe;  those  efforts  were  also  commemorated  when  the  first  European  Act  of  State  honored this key architect of the Maastricht treaty. For ten points, name this Chancellor of Germany during its reunification.	ANSWER: Helmut Kohl Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 5
Samuel Wyllys was technically the owner of this thing, which received its name from an item that was supposed to be taken at Butler’s Tavern. This thing was killed in an 1856 thunderstorm, and it was immortalized  on  the  fifth-issued  state  quarter  in  1999.  In  1687,  Joseph  Wadsworth  prevented  Edmund Andros from seizing a poorly-written contract by hiding it in this object. For ten points, name this tree that once held a royal document belonging to Connecticut Colony.	ANSWER: CharterOak
The  title  character  of  one  of  this  man’s  operas  sings  an  aria  based  on  “Home  Sweet  Home”  while imprisoned in the Tower of London. This composer ofAnna Bolenaalso wrote about an executed favorite of Elizabeth I inRoberto Devereux. This composer wrote another opera based on a Sir Walter Scott novel in which the title character sings “Il dolce suono” in her “mad scene.” For ten points, name thisbel canto composer, a contemporary of Vincenzo Bellini who composedLucia di Lammermoor.	ANSWER: Domenico Gaetano MariaDonizetti
The admiral Pierre de Suffren helped introduce copper-bottoms to this kingdom’s navy, which was led by mir yams. This kingdom developed projectiles fired from iron tubes that, after they fell into enemy hands, inspired the development of the Congreve rocket. Its successful invasion of Travancore under Tipu Sultan triggered the third of four wars with a European power; Tipu died at Srirangapatna at the end of the fourth of those wars. For ten points, name this kingdom that ruled southern India for four centuries until it was subjugated by the British.	ANSWER: Kingdom of Mysore
This  author’s  time  in  poverty  in  the  East  End  influenced  his  bookThe  People  of  the  Abyss.  This author controversially used the word “yellow” to refer to the Chinese during their genocide by biological warfare in his story “The Unparalleled Invasion.” This writer twice unsuccessfully ran as a socialist for Mayor of Oakland. This author’s story “To Build a Fire” is set during the Alaskan Gold Rush, much like his novel about the sled dog Buck. For ten points, name this author ofThe Call of the Wild.	ANSWER: John Griffith “Jack”London(or John GriffithChaney)
This man dismissed a commissioner who would go on to lead the Army Comrade Association, which sought  to  prevent  physical  intimidation  by  a  group  supported  by  this  man.  This  man  attempted  to reconcile  with  Richard  Mulcahy  after  fighting  broke  out  at  the  Four  Courts.  This  man  backed  a  group sometimes  known  as  the  “Irregulars”  that  warred  with  a  faction  led  by  William  Cosgrave.  When  his motion regarding eligibility in theD ́ail  Ifwas rejected, this man broke from Sinn F ́ein. For ten points, name this first Taoiseach [TEE-shuh] of Ireland and founder of Fianna F ́ail[fi-annafoil].	ANSWER: ́ Eamon de Valera Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 5
This event was investigated by a commission headed by the president of Dartmouth, John Kemeny. When  this  event  was  politicized  by  Jane  Fonda,  Edward  Teller  wrote  aWall  Street  Journalarticle claiming that the heart attack he suffered the next day made him the “only victim of” it. Governor Dick Thornburgh ordered an evacuation within five miles of this event, which was mitigated by the SCRAM emergency  protocol  when  faulty  valves  caused  steam  generators  to  not  receive  enough  water.  For  ten points, name this Carter-era disaster in which a Pennsylvania reactor went into partial meltdown.	ANSWER: ThreeMileIslandnuclear accident (accept descriptions of the (partial) meltdown atThree MileIsland; prompt on descriptions that don’t name the facility)
In 2013, this leader declared that youth should “dare to dream” and “contribute to the revitalization of  the  nation.”  In  2012,  this  leader  wrote  the  Eight  Point  Regulations,  which  called  for  making  the party “closer to the masses.” After taking office in 2013, this leader launched a massive anti-corruption campaign, vowing to crack down on the “tigers and flies” and arresting Xu Caihou and Zhou Yongkang. For ten points, name this current Paramount leader of China.	ANSWER: XiJinping
James Conway founded a powerful democratic faction in this state called “The Family.” In a conflict in this state, a speech by Jack Agery about a fearsome bull led one side to be labeled the “Brindle Tails;” that Reconstruction-era conflict arose after disputes over an 1872 gubernatorial election and was known as the Brooks-Baxter War. In a Civil War battle in this state, Samuel Curtis defeated Earl Van Dorn at Pea Ridge. For ten points, name this state where railroad construction led to immigration to the southern Ozarks and which was the site of Civil War action in cities like Hot Springs and Little Rock.	ANSWER: Arkansas
This  man’s  brother  Johnnie  agreed  to  serve  an  extra  tour  in  Vietnam,  allowing  this  man  to  win the  1968  US  Open;  due  to  his  amateur  status,  he  earned  just  $20  instead  of  the  $14,000  prize.  Jimmy Connors dropped a law suit against this man’s organization shortly after he defeated Connors in the finals of Wimbledon in 1975. This man, who names the main stadium at Flushing Meadows, once said “AIDS killed  my  body,  but  racism  is  harder  to  bear.”  For  ten  points,  name  this  African-American  tennis  star who died in 1993.	ANSWER: Arthur Robert Ashe, Jr
The remnants of this group surrendered after their headquarters were raided by the American 71st Division  in  Austria,  shortly  after  it  was  reconstituted  as  the  “Ostmark”  organization.  This  group  was split into “A” and “B” designations to launch a two pronged strike in a grab for the Baku oil fields during Operation  Blue.  Hermann  Hoth’s  4th  Panzer  Army  was  transferred  to  this  group  shortly  before  it  lost Friedrich Paulus’ Sixth Army at Stalingrad. For ten points, name this German army group that pushed into the Ukraine and the Caucasus on the onset of Operation Barbarossa.	ANSWER: Army Group South(accept Army GroupOstmarkbefore mentioned) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 5
One member of this family wrote the workWar or Peace, which promoted liberation as an alternative to containment. One member of this family was a director of United Fruit at the same time that another member,  a  former  attorney  for  that  company,  advised  the  president  to  launch  the  overthrow  of  Jacopo Arbenz in Operation PBSUCESS. The latter member of this family organized SEATO and developed the strategy of “massive retaliation” for the Eisenhower administration. For ten points, name this family of CIA director Allen and Secretary of State John Foster, the latter of whom names an international airport in Washington, DC.	ANSWER: Dulles(accept  John  FosterDulles,  or  AllenDulles,  or  WashingtonDullesInternational Airport)
One leader of a kingdom centered at this city was executed at Castello de Pizzo after an ill-advised expedition that ended at the Battle of Tolentino; that man was Joachim Murat. The Battle of Cerignola confirmed Bourbon Spanish rule of this city, which was abandoned just before the Battle of the Volturnus. A kingdom with capital at this city was ended at the Siege of Gaeta. The Sicilian Vespers removed Sicily from the control of this city, which was targeted by the Expedition of a Thousand. For ten points, name this southern Italian city, the capital of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.	ANSWER: Naples
This  treaty  was  preceded  by  the  similar  Peace  of  Passau  three  years  prior.  Knights  were  exempt from  this  treaty  under  the  Declaratio  Ferdinandei,  and  it  followed  a  failed  “Interim”  period  that  was broken by Maurice of Saxony. This treaty, which failed to address the reformed religions of Calvinism and Anabaptism, was signed between the Schmalkaldic League and representatives of Charles V. The principle ofcuius regio eius religiowas  promoted  by,  for  ten  points,  what  1555  treaty  that  allowed  each  prince within the Holy Roman Empire to choose the religion of his territory?	ANSWER: Peace of Augsburg
During this war, Mickey Marcus built a supply route out of Hulda whose name was inspired by an earlier supply route out of Burma. After the last battle in this conflict, a handmade flag called the Ink Flag was raised. An armistice to end this war was negotiated by Ralph Bunche, who took the position of UN mediator after Folke Bernadotte was assassinated by the terrorist group Lehi. As a result of this war, Egypt  occupied  the  Gaza  Strip  and  their  opponent  expanded  beyond  the  Partition  Plan’s  boundaries. For ten points, name this war in which Israel repelled an invasion by its neighbors right after it declared independence.	ANSWER: FirstArab-IsraeliWar (orArab-IsraeliWar of1948; orIsraeliWarofIndependence; orAl-Nakba) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl V Semifinals and JV Finals
ATimemagazine article titled “The Price of Optimism” sarcastically referred to this body of water as “some river” in the same year that Mayor Carl Stokes held a press conference on its shores. A 1969 article misleadingly  used  a  1952  photo  of  a  destroyed  tugboat  on  this  river  to  support  the  claims  that  it  was “chocolate-brown, bubbling with subsurface gases.” It is best known for spurring numerous environmental laws after it caught on fire in June 1969. For ten points, name this Ohio river that feeds Lake Erie.	ANSWER: CuyahogaRiver
One song of this country’s army is about a girl whose shares a name with a flower called “Erika”. All the verses of one song used in this country start with the word “storm” repeated six times. A song from this country, “Forward! Forward!” was first performed in a film about Herbert Norkus. One national anthem of this country was also called “The Flag on High.” A song used by its tank units was featured in the 1965 filmBattle of the Bulge. For ten points, name this country whose songs includedVorwarts! Vorwarts!,Horst Wessel Lied, andPanzerlied.	ANSWER: Nazi Germany(or theThirdReich; orDeutschland; or GrossdeutschesReich)
This work begins with a discussion of mbari, muhiriga, and riika, or family, clan and age group. This work discusses its subject’s system of land tenure and discusses the Wakamba and Maasai in addition to its  subject.  This  essay  collection,  which  describes  its  author’s  ethnicity’s  contact  with  colonialism,  was written  for  an  anthropology  seminar  taught  by  Bronislaw  Malinowski,  who  wrote  its  preface.  For  ten points, name this book by Jomo Kenyatta about his native country’s Kikuyu people.	ANSWER: FacingMountKenya
One monument from this empire was displayed at the Porta Capena as a spoil of war. Saint Frumentius is credited with Christianizing this empire, which accepted Muslim refugees in the First Hijrah. A major expansion of this empire occurred after it conquered the Himyarite Kingdom under Kaleb. This empire was conquered by Gudit, who established the Zagwe dynasty. The Ark of the Covenant was supposedly brought to the capital city of this empire, though more real artifacts of this empire include many stone stelae [steel-ay]. The Queen of Sheba supposedly lived in, for ten points, what early kingdom in what is now Ethiopia?	ANSWER:Axumite Kingdom (orAksumite Kingdom; accept empire, etc. for kingdom)
Description acceptable. The subject of this event ominously noted “If someone has decided to drown, it is no longer possible to save them,” rather than choose between saving either of two world leaders. The 2016 iteration of this event, the 14th overall, opened with an oblique reference to a “pothole fairy” and resulted in road crews being immediately sent to Omsk. This event usually takes several hours, and the content of the event is believed to be vetted before hand, though the Kremlin Press Secretary denies that. For  ten  points,  name  this  annual  event  in  which  citizens  can  immediately  pass  their  concerns  on  to  a certain head of state.	ANSWER: DirectLinewith Vladimir Putin (accept descriptions of “theTVshowin which Russians call(ore-mailor otherwise communicate with), asking questions for VladimirPutin”) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl V Semifinals and JV Finals
In this location, Kolgrim was accused of using sorcery to seduce the wife of Torgrim; he was burned at  the  stake  after  his  trial  at  athingsteadin  the  city  of  Gardar,  where  Norse  settlers  established  a bishopric in 1126. Claus Paarss founded a fort at Godt-Haab in this location. The Brattahild was Erik the Red’s estate on this island, whose name he devised as a marketing ploy. For ten points, name this largest non-continental  island  in  the  world,  home  to  a  country  whose  government  system  continues  to  include some Danish control.	ANSWER: GreenlandorKalaallitNunaat
In this year, Maryland senator Charles Mathias criticized his party’s drift towards radicalism and considered  a  primary  run.  John  Tower  was  chosen  to  manage  one  candidate’s  campaign  at  his  party’s nominating  convention  in  this  year,  only  to  not  be  chosen  as  a  delegate  after  his  candidate  lost  Texas. This year was the most recent in which no candidate won enough delegates to automatically become the nominee.  For  ten  points,  name  this  year  in  which  the  Republican  convention  resulted  in  Gerald  Ford defeating Ronald Reagan, only to lose the general election to Jimmy Carter.	ANSWER: 1976
This man’s campaign manager Stephen Dorsey was implicated in the Star Routes scandal, leading to investigation by his attorney general Wayne MacVeagh. This man’s choice of William Robertson to replace Edwin Merritt to be Collector of the Port of New York brought this man into conflict with pro-patronage figures like Senator Roscoe Conkling. For ten points, name this president assassinated in 1880 by Charles Guiteau, thus promoting Grover Cleveland to become president.	ANSWER: James AbramGarfield
Rida  Hamida  and  Ben  Vazquez  began  a  regular  event  to  set  up  these  establishments  “at  every mosque” in Orange County, California, providing their first iftar in June 2017. Marco Gutierrez warned about  the  proliferation  of  these  establishments,  noting  “My  culture  is  a  very  dominant  culture,”  in  a widely mocked 2016 interview; many critics of that interview also cited an earlier tweet claiming “I love Hispanics!” For ten points, name these establishments that Gutierrez, the leader of Latinos for Trump, warned would be “on every corner” if Mexican immigration continued.	ANSWER: tacotrucks (prompt on partial answers, like “food trucks” or answers related to selling tacos)
A  man  from  this  family  unsuccessfully  tried  to  defend  the  Philadelphia  Cordwainers  and  won  an election by fifteen votes against James A. Bayard. Members of this family lived atByfieldand included a man who covered his face with a scarf because of facial cancer. After Thomas McKean and George Read deadlocked on a vote, a member of this family rode to Philadelphia “in his boots and spurs” through a thunderstorm. For ten points, name this Delaware family that included Caesar.	ANSWER: Rodney
This  man  gained  power  after  winning  the  support  of  Megacles,  head  of  theparalioifaction.  This man’s archival of the Odyssey and Iliad helped preserve the two copies used today. Under this man’s rule, the hill-dwellinghyperakrioiwere enfranchised and served as his power base. The dynasty founded by this man fell apart after his sons were targeted by Harmodius and Aristogeiton. For ten points, identify this tyrant of Athens who ruled from 561 BC and fathered both Hippias and Hipparchus.	ANSWER: Peisistratos(orPisistratus)
In the essayBlind Nightmare, this author examined the impact of a 1995 terrorist attack on his home country,  and  this  author  interviewed  people  about  those  attacks  in  his  workUnderground.  In  addition to the essay collectionWhat  I  Talk  About  When  I  Talk  About  Running, this author wrote a novel set in a  timeline  with  two  moons,  which  follows  Tengo  and  Aomame.  For  ten  points,  name  this  author  who was inspired by Aum Shinrikyo’s gas attacks to write1Q84, who also wroteKilling  Commendatoreand Norwegian Wood.	ANSWER: HarukiMurakami
As White House Communications Director, this man remarked that the greatest vacuum in American politics was to the right of Ronald Reagan. This man criticized the “giant masquerade ball” of the 1992 Democratic National Convention in a speech that described a “religious war” for the “soul of America”. This coiner of the term “Silent Majority” delivered the “culture war” speech in a failed attempt to gain the 1992 Republican nomination. For ten points, name this paleoconservative former Nixon adviser, the Reform Party nominee in 2000.	ANSWER: Patrick Buchanan Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 6
This monument was bankrolled after the filmThe Deer Hunterinspired Jan Scruggs to form a fund. Visitors  often  use  crayons  to  trace  this  monument’s  etchings  onto  a  piece  of  paper,  a  ritual  known  as “rubbing.” The Mayaguez Affair marks the final date new entries were accepted into this monument. Ross Perot derided this monument’s architect as an eggroll over its design, which was insulted as a “black gash of shame.” Names of servicemen are listed on a granite wall on this monument. For ten points, identify this Maya Lin monument that commemorates a war in Southeast Asia.	ANSWER: VietnamWarmemorial
W. A. Boyle, a head of this union, ordered the death of reformer Joseph Yablonski. Illinois Governor John  Riley  Tanner  promised  he  would  shoot  up  rail  cars  with  strikebreakers  against  this  union  in  the Battle  of  Virden.  Strikes  called  by  this  union  led  to  racial  unrest  at  Pana,  Illinois.  This  organization sought benefits for people suffering from Black Lung Disease. A co-founder of the CIO, John Lewis, was also a president of this union. In 1894, this union called for the bituminous coal miners’ strike. For ten points, name this union which represents coal miners.	ANSWER: UMWA (UnitedMineWorkersof America)
This action unintentionally created an exclave that became the short-lived Free State of Bottleneck. The  Hauptwache  Incident  during  this  action  prompted  racist  campaigns  against  the  “Black  Shame,” colonial troops participating in this action. This action was prematurely ended by the Young Plan and was intended to guarantee continued reparations payments by its target country. French and Belgian troops invaded the Ruhr in, for ten points, what military action where Allied troops were stationed in post-WWI western Germany?	ANSWER: OccupationoftheRhineland(prompt on “Occupation of the Ruhrland” until mention)
In  Catholicism,  St.  Gemolo  is  said  to  have  survived  one  of  these  events,  while  Paul  said  “Jesus Christ” 50 times after undergoing this punishment. On a Christian feast day commemorating one of these actions, the pious will not eat from flat plates, use knives, or eat round foods. Salome asked for this action to be done on John the Baptist. For ten points, name this action which is the official execution method described by Saudi Sharia law, and which might be done with a sword or guillotine.	ANSWER: Beheading(acceptDecapitation; accept reasonable equivalents)
This  man  kicked  freeloading  nobles  out  of  his  capital  as  part  of  his  Jianyuan  Reforms.  This  man brought an end to Xiongnu raids after winning the Battle of Mobei, marking a departure from Liu Bang’s “heqin”  strategy  of  marriage  alliances.  The  Imperial  University  was  constructed  under  this  man  after decreeing Confucianism the state philosophy of Han. His 54 year reign was not beaten in length until the Qing dynasty. For ten points, identify this seventh Han ruler who expanded the empire to its territorial height.	ANSWER: HanWuDi Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 6
Cynthia  Ann  Parker  lived  most  of  her  life  among  this  Native  American  group.  Buffalo  Hump,  a leader of these people, led the Great Raid of 1840 after over thirty of their chieftains were massacred in the Council House Fight. The Kiowa, the Apache, and this group fought against American troops at the two  battles  of  Adobe  Walls,  and  they  effectively  controlled  large  parts  of  northern  Mexico  prior  to  the Mexican-American War. For ten points, name this Native American group who were the foremost raiders of the Great Plains in the first half of the 19th century.	ANSWER: Comanche
A prophetess tells this historical figure that he will be able to speak clearly in 1900 years; that occurs in a novel in which this figure catches a wounded wolf cub that is dropped from the sky by two feuding eagles. In Hell, this character is condemned to play dice with a bottomless box in a play by Seneca titled theApocolocyntosis, orPumpkinification, of this man. In a 1934 novel, this man uses his stutter to play the  fool  and  avoid  the  schemes  of  Livia  and  Sejanus.  For  ten  points,  name  this  Roman  emperor,  the subject of a novel by Robert Graves titledI, [this man].	ANSWER: Claudius
The Earl of Bothwell was imprisoned in a fortress in this city originally built by Eric of Pomerania; that fortress is now a museum complex. This city’s formerly-industrial V ̈astra Hamnen neighborhood is now a gentrified neighborhood marked by Santiago Calatrava’s Turning Torso residential skyscraper. This city in Scania, southwest of Lund, is the eastern terminus of an international bridge that passes the island of Saltholm. For ten points, name this city across the Oresund Bridge from Copenhagen in Sweden.	ANSWER: Malmo
This historian’s namesake law argues that disaster is far less common than various reports suggest. A  book  by  this  historian  that  is  sometimes  titledSand  Against  the  Windexamines  the  life  of  Joseph Stilwell  in  China.  A  discussion  of  the  Little  Ice  Age  opens  another  book  by  this  historian  that  covers the “Calamitous 14th Century.” This historian is best known for a 1962 work whose “Outbreak” section details Franz Ferdinand’s assassination. For ten points, name this female historian who wroteA  Distant MirrorandThe Guns of August.	ANSWER: Barbara Wertheim Tuchman
This  agreement  was  explained  in  the  Basset  letter,  which  claimed  it  would  help  those  “under  the yoke of tyrants.” The Declaration to the Seven was made in the aftermath of this agreement by Henry McMahon, who resigned due to it. This agreement, which guaranteed “freedom of transit” at Alexandretta, gave the Acre-Haifa enclave to the British despite it being a part of a “brown zone.” For ten points, name this agreement by Britain and France that split up the remains of the Ottoman Empire.	ANSWER: Sykes-PicotAgreement Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 6
Judith  Leavitt  claims  that  William  Randolph  Hearst  may  have  paid  this  woman’s  legal  fees  in exchange  for  her  story.  Sarah  Josephine  Baker  investigated  this  woman,  who  evaded  George  Soper  by adopting  the  last  name  Brown  and  frequently  changing  jobs.  This  woman  was  twice  confined  to  North Brother Island’s quarantine facilities. Over 50 people in New York were sickened by, for ten points, what turn of the 20th century cook who was an asymptomatic carrier of a certain bacterial fever?	ANSWER: TyphoidMary(accept MaryMallon; accept MaryBrownbefore “Brown” is read; prompt on Mary)
This  man  was  the  primary  author  of  the  Foraker  Act,  which  laid  the  groundwork  for  civilian  rule over Puerto Rico. This man, who served as the inaugural chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations, was succeeded as Secretary of War by William Howard Taft. In his highest post, this man maintained the Open Door policy of his predecessor, John Hay, by negotiating an agreement that limited the immigration of Japanese-Americans to California with Takahira Kogoro. For ten points, name this Secretary of State under Theodore Roosevelt and winner of the 1912 Nobel Peace Prize.	ANSWER: Elihu Root
To  settle  a  territorial  dispute,  Sparta  and  this  city  organized  the  Battle  of  the  Champions,  where 300 soldiers from each side fought to the death. A ruler of this city seized power after marching on the Olympic  games  and  decisively  defeated  Sparta  at  the  Battle  of  Hysiae;  that  ruler  was  named  Pheidon. Pyrrhus of Epirus was killed by a falling tile in this city, the home of the legendary Adrastus, the organizer of  the  Seven  Against  Thebes.  Philip  II  of  Macedon  and  Alexander  the  Great  were  members  of  a  royal house named for this city. For ten points, name this city-state that frequently clashed with Sparta over the Peloponnese.	ANSWER: Argos
This event inspired Elton Simpson to participate in a similar attack on the Curtis Culwell Center in Texas.  The  perpetrators  of  this  attack  were  killed  during  a  gunfight  in  the  Dammartin-en-Go ̈ele  siege. A man who used the pen name Cabu was killed in this event, which was carried out by two brothers of Algerian  descent  in  response  to  cartoons  making  fun  of  Mohammad.  After  this  event,  supporters  of  its target carried around signs reading “Je suis [its cartoon mascot].” For ten points, name this 2015 attack that targeted a newspaper office in Paris.	ANSWER: CharlieHebdoshooting (or attack, etc.)
During  this  period,  Paul  G ́erin-Lajoie  secularized  the  school  system  and  established  CEGEPs [say-ZHEPS].  This  period  began  with  the  election  of  Jean  Lesage  and  followed  the  “Great  Darkness” of  Maurice  Duplessis’s  term  as  premier.  During  this  period,  Ren ́e  L ́evesque  built  on  the  example  of Adam Beck and Tommy Douglas to buy out rural co-ops to form a state-owned hydroelectric monopoly. A  provincial  welfare  state  was  built  in,  for  ten  points,  what  period  of  secularization  and  economic development of the early 1960s in Quebec?	ANSWER: QuietRevolution(orR ́evolutiontranquille) Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 6
In  2013,  a  central  figure  in  this  case  went  on  a  speaking  tour  with  Mike  Hiestand.  InMorse v. Frederick, the precedent set by this case was not followed in favor of one set byBethel v. Fraser.Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeierrestricted some of the freedoms granted by this case, whose dissent was written by Hugo Black  and  John  Harlan.  This  case  was  precipitated  when  students  refused  to  remove  black  armbands protesting American involvement in Vietnam. For ten points, name this Supreme Court case that forced an Iowa school to recognize the First Amendment rights of schoolchildren.	ANSWER: Tinkerv. Des Moines (Independent Community School District)
Julia Domna was the daughter of a priest associated with this deity. Coins under the emperor Probus depict  this  deity  riding  in  a  four-horsedquadriga.  A  temple  in  theCampus Agrippaewas  dedicated  to this deity by the emperor Aurelian, who established the official cult of this deity. Though not related to Christianity, this deity’s feast day was celebrated on December 25th. Elagabalus was assimilated with, for ten points, what Roman deity with a name that translates to “Unconquered Sun?”	ANSWER: SolInvictus(acceptElagabalusuntil  “December”  is  read;  acceptUnconquerableSun before mentioned)
This location can be seen from Dante’s View, and was the site of the prehistoric Lake Manly. The Timbisha tribe lives at Furnace Creek in this landform, which was made a national monument by Herbert Hoover  in  1933  and  a  national  park  in  1994.  Francis  Marion  Smith  employed  twenty-mule  teams  to transport borax out of this area on the border of the Mojave and Great Basin Deserts. Badwater Basin reaches  282  feet  below  sea  level  in,  for  ten  points,  what  California  valley,  the  lowest  point  in  North America?	ANSWER:DeathValley(accept  descriptions  ofDeathValleyNational  Park;  prompt  on  Mojave Desert before mentioned)
This man’s 1979 summit with Jimmy Carter ended with Carter unsuccessfully proselytizing to this man. This man briefly became a communist after his older brother died during the Autumn Uprising of 1946. After seizing power in the May 16 coup, this man’s administration passed the Yushin constitution and instituted the New Village Movement to modernize the rural economy. This man survived an attempt on his life in the 1968 Blue House Raid, and was later assassinated by Kim Jae-gyu, his intelligence chief, in 1979. For ten points, name this third President of South Korea, a dictator whose daughter is a recently impeached president.	ANSWER: ParkChung-hee(prompt on either name alone) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 6
This series inspired the title of a 2005 Eugene Jarecki documentary analyzing the military-industrial complex. The fifth entry in this series opens with footage fromAlexander NevskyandPeter the First. A statement by Henry Stimson was edited into the first entry of this series, which contained footage from Triumph of the Will; that work was released four years before its creator directedIt’s a Wonderful Life. For ten points, name this series of seven pro-American propaganda films created by Frank Capra during World War II.	ANSWER: WhyWeFight
English cities that produced this resource were often given the suffix “-wich.” L ̈uneburg’s Hanseatic status was due to this good, which was shipped from L ̈ beck to the Scania Market. M ̈unich was founded using  revenue  from  this  resource.  Thegabellewas  a  controversial  French  tax  on  this  good.  Venice  and Ferrara feuded over the production of this good in the Commachio, leading to a namesake war. For ten points, name this good, which comes in rock and sea varieties and is used to preserve fish.	ANSWER: salt
The  documentaryWith Babies and Bannersanalyzes  the  role  of  a  Women’s  Emergency  Brigade during this event, which Henry Kraus helped organize. Governor Frank Murphy acted as an intermediary between  the  two  parties  after  one  side  refused  to  meet  with  Homer  Martin.  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt refused to federally intervene in this strike, which partly took place in the Chevrolet Number 4 plant. For ten  points,  name  this  1936-1937  strike  against  General  Motors  in  which  workers  refused  to  leave  their stations.	ANSWER: 1936-1937 GreatFlintsit-downstrike(or the GreatGeneralMotorssit-downstrike; “strike” not needed after it is mentioned; prompt on partial answers)
A  fire  at  this  man’s  home  destroyed  his  bookDialogues against the Peripatetics and Galenists,  in which he rejected the non-experimental methods of ancient thinkers. While dissecting a black man, this man discovered the mucus that was responsible for skin pigmentation. This scientist, who is thought to have been the first to directly observe red blood cells, was appointed papal physician by Pope Innocent XII in 1691. For ten points, name this Italian biologist who names a set of renal corpuscles in the kidney and a set of excretory tubules in insects.	ANSWER: Marcello Malpighi(acceptMalpighiancorpuscles and/or tubules)
This battle is described in the most common lyrics of the song “Lillibulero.” A year after this battle, an  evacuation  of  troops  called  the  Flight  of  the  Wild  Geese  occurred  following  the  Treaty  of  Limerick. This battle is celebrated on “the Twelfth,” and it featured a successful river crossing by the Blue Guard. The loser of this battle had thrown his signet ring into the Thames two years prior. This battle occurred during the War of the Grand Alliance and is named for a river. For ten points, name this 1690 battle, fought after the Glorious Revolution, at which William III decisively beat James II in Ireland.	ANSWER: Battle of the River Boyne Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 6
The Angel Phase of these people is speculated to have led to the emergence of the Caborn-Welborn group. These people established the Parkin site along the St. Francis River, a location considered to be part of the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex culture. In order to mark the passing of solstices, these people built  a  timber  circle  that  archaeologists  dubbed  Woodhenge.  These  people  constructed  the  pyramidal Monks Mound at an urban center near modern St. Louis. For ten points, name this Pre-Columbian Native American civilization that inhabited the Cahokia site by a namesake river.	ANSWER: Mississipians  (acceptMississippianpeople,  culture,  etc.;  prompt  on  Native  Americans before mentioned; anti-prompt on Cahokia before mentioned)
During one of these conflicts, the Lord Eliot Convention sought to prevent the execution of prisoners of war. The Marques del Duero lifted the siege of Bilbao during the last of these conflicts. The first of these conflicts was ended by the Convention of Vergara, which granted limited home rule to the Basque population, although that was later revoked by Alfonso XII. These conflicts failed to oust Queen Isabella II from the throne. For ten points, name this set of Spanish civil wars fought by supporters of the namesake brother of Ferdinand VII.	ANSWER: CarlistWars
In one opera by this composer, Enrichietta, the widow of King Charles I, escapes from prison with the help of the Royalist Arturo, whose absence sends his fianc ́ee, Elvira, into madness. This composer ofI puritaniwrote an opera in which Amina sleepwalks and another in which the ariaCasta Divais sung by a Druid priestess who throws herself onto a funeral pyre. For ten points, name this bel canto composer of La sonnambulaandNorma.	ANSWER: Vincenzo Bellini
Project  635  is  a  canal  designed  to  divert  water  from  the  Irtysh  River  to  this  province.  The  Tarim River flows across this province, and ends at Lop Nur. During the Ili Rebellion, the Soviet Union backed the breakaway republic of East Turkestan in this province. This province and Pakistan’s Gilgit-Baltistan administrative region share the world’s  second highest mountain, K2. For ten points, name this North- Western autonomous region of China whose capital is Urumqi and which is home to the Uyghur people.	ANSWER: XinjiangProvince
Destroying this object was the main purpose of the British Type 106 Fuze and the Bangalore torpedo of World War I. The first successful form of this device was bootlegged by the Southern Company of John Warne Gates; that form of this entity was “The Winner” of 1873. This invention caused the Great Die Up during the so-called Cutting Wars and Range Wars of the late 19th century. Although Lucien Smith probably has the better claim, this invention is usually ascribed to Joseph Glidden. The American frontier was drastically changed by the invention of, for ten points, what kind of sharp livestock fencing?	ANSWER: barbedwire
The emperor’s location during this battle was revealed after the defection of Taguchi Shigeyoshi. The losers of this battle name a type of crab which supposedly depict the faces of soldiers who died during it. During this battle, two of the Imperial Regalia were thrown into Straits of Shimonoseki along with the child Emperor Antoku. For ten points, name this 1185 naval battle in which the Minamoto defeated the Taira, ending the Genpei War.	ANSWER: Battle of Dan-no-ura Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl V Finals
In this country, Emilia Plater participated in an insurgency that tried to oust Grand Duke Constantine, Wojciech  Glowacki[VOY-checkglo-VATZ-kee]  became  a  national  hero  by  capturing  a  Russian  cannon at  the  Battle  of  Raclawice[rah-swa-veetz-ah].  Vasili  Popov  established  a  confederation  opposed  to  this country’s  1791  constitution  at  Targowica,  which  helped  put  down  scythe-wielding  peasants  fighting  in the Kosciuszko Uprising. For ten points, name this country, whose citizens rebelled after, in 1793, it was partitioned for the second time.	ANSWER: Poland
One  side  in  this  battle  refused  to  give  combat  until  two  swords  were  sent  to  their  general  as  a challenge. The Siege of Marienberg occurred shortly before this battle, which led to the Peace of Thorn. Ulrich von Jungingen was killed leading a charge against the troops of Vytautas and Jagiello, leading to a romanticization of this battle in Nazi propaganda. Though it took place nowhere nearby, the greatest victory of Hindenberg and Ludendorff in World War 1 shares a name with this battle so that the defeat of the Teutonic Knights in this battle could be avenged. For ten points, name this large medieval battle between Poland-Lithuania and the Teutonic Order.	ANSWER: Battle of Grunwald(or Battle ofZalgiris; acceptFirstBattleofTannenburg; prompt on Tannenburg)
Another person with this surname used an apprenticeship under Ari Davis to invent the first known coupling  of  lock  stitcher  and  automatic  feeder;  that  man  sued  Walter  Hunt  and  Isaac  Singer,  who  had pirated his invention. Another person with this surname wrote the lyrics to the song performed at Winston Churchill’s funeral whose tune is the marching song “John Brown’s Body.” For ten points, give this last name of both sewing machine inventor Elias and poetess of “Battle Hymn of the Republic” Julia Ward, as well as British General William, who captured Philadelphia in 1777.	ANSWER: Howe(accept Julia WardHowe, EliasHowe, and/or WilliamHowe)
In  this  battle,  Craterus  waited  in  camp  for  an  opportune  moment,  then  took  the  Haranpur  ford. Mud hindered the losing side’s chariots, and their elephants were forced back onto their own allies after a phalanx charge. The winning side in this battle crossed the Jhelum on floats made of hay. The Nanda Empire was vulnerable after this battle, though the winner declined to press on, choosing to return west after his army complained and his horse, Bucephalus, died. For ten points, name this 326 BC victory over King Porus by Alexander the Great, after which Macedon claimed the Punjab.	ANSWER: Battle of the HydaspesRiver (accept Battle of theJhelumRiver before Jhelum is said)
One member of this family led a team to analyze the unequal ways that the Encyclopedia Britannica treated women in its entries. The most famous member of this family wrote a 1913 book arguing that the Founding Fathers were strongly motivated by a desire to protect their property and financial standings. Two members of this family collaborated onThe  Rise  of  American  Civilization, and another wroteAn Economic  Interpretation  of  the  Constitution.  For  ten  points,  name  this  family  of  historians  Mary  and Charles.	ANSWER: Beard(acceptRitterbefore “Founding Fathers”) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl V Finals
The background of this war and the author’s own experience in it were the subject of a book by Lt. General Philip Davidson. John Paul Vann’s actions during this war are the subject of Neil Sheehan’s A  Bright  Shining  Lie. Mike Gravel entered another work relating to this war into Congressional record; that work was released by Daniel Ellsberg toThe  New  York  Timesafter being commissioned by Robert McNamara and discussed leaders like Ngo Dinh Diem. For ten points, name this conflict written about in many biographies of Lyndon Johnson.	ANSWER: VietnamWar
This  ruler  was  said  to  have  died  in  a  library  after  tripping  down  a  staircase.  After  the  battle  of Chausa, Shah Tahmasp spared this ruler’s life when he chose to convert to Shia Islam. Tahmasp would later support this ruler in a war against Kamran Mirza. This ruler was forced to escape to Safavid Persia after  Sher  Shah  Suri  overran  Bengal.  The  general  Bairam  Khan  first  rose  to  prominence  in  the  service of this ruler; Bairam would go on to be the regent for this ruler’s son, Akbar. For ten points, name this Mughal emperor who succeeded Babur.	ANSWER: Humayun
This  organization  founded  the  monthly  reviewKrestianka,  a  companion  publication  to  this organization’s  centralRabotnitsapublication.  Members  of  this  organization  were  sometimes  attacked during  its  controversial  “de-veiling”  campaign  in  Central  Asia.  Inessa  Armand  helped  co-found  this organization, which successfully campaigned for the right to free abortions in state hospitals, granted in 1920. For ten points, name this Soviet “women’s department” which was led by Alexandra Kollontai.	ANSWER: Zhenotdel(accept the Sovietwomen’sdepartmentuntil mention)
This group was frequently mistreated by Anthony Whitting and Hiland Crow. Nancy Quander and Sukey  Bay,  part  of  the  oldest  black  African  family  in  America,  were  part  of  this  group.  One  of  these people, Billy Lee, holds a horse in a portrait painted at Princeton. John Bowles helped Oney Judge, one of these people, escape on theNancy. Christopher Sheels, one of these people, was present at his owner’s deathbed, after which all of these people were freed by the contents of their owner’s will. For ten points, name these black Americans held in captivity by the first President.	ANSWER: George Washington’sslaves(prompt on slaves; prompt on “black” people before it is read)
Halston dresses were often designed for use at these locations. Steve Rubell and Ian Schrager opened one of these locations in Manhattan originally known as the Gallo Opera House. The Cocoanut Grove fire at one of these locations in Boston killed over 400 people in 1942. Omar Mateen attacked one of these locations in Orlando during “Latin Night” in 2016; that one of these locations was named “Pulse”. Studio 54 and the Peppermint Lounge were examples of, for ten points, what entertainment venues that feature live music and drinks?	ANSWER: night clubs
A 1983 performance of this song featured background rhythm from a prerecorded drum and keyboard track and ended with the crowd at the Forum “clapping like a gospel choir.” That version of this song lasted over five minutes in an early rehearsal, but Marvin Gaye kept it to a more traditional two-and-a-half at the NBA All-Star Game. Super Bowl 25, which took place a week into the First Gulf War, saw Whitney Houston give possibly the most famous rendition of, for ten points, what patriotic song that often leads off American sporting events?	ANSWER:  The Star-SpangledBanner(acceptAmericannationalanthem;  prompt  on  partial answers)
During this conflict, Hans Kundt bungled the strategy of one country by sending tanks into terrain where  they  could  not  operate.  In  its  opening,  one  country  launched  a  bold  offensive  that  led  to  the Battle of Boquer ́on. In its aftermath, Daniel Salamanca was overthrown as president, and border disputes surrounding this war were largely resolved in a 1938 Buenos Aires peace settlement. For ten points, name this 1932-1935 conflict fought by Bolivia and Paraguay for control of oil in the namesake arid region.	ANSWER: Gran ChacoWar Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 7
Jack  Butler’s  Planters  Association  infiltrated  a  group  of  strikers  of  this  ethnicity  led  by  Pablo Manlapit. Many people of this ethnicity died in the Hanapepe Sugar strike. A 1920 Oahu strike involved strikers of Japanese descent and these people, many of whom died of the Spanish Flu during that strike. With  Philip  Vera  Cruz,  these  people  who  referred  to  themselves  as  Pinoy,  teamed  up  with  strikers  of Mexican descent in the Delano Grape strike. Asian people of this ethnicity came under the control of the United States after the Spanish American War. For ten points, which people came from an island nation governed from Manila?	ANSWER: Filipinos(acceptFilipino-Americans)
This  author  wrote  a  novel  in  which  the  theater  operator  Shepsie  Tirschwell  moved  his  family  to Winnipeg and the narrator’s cousin Alvin fought for the Canadian army. In that novel by this author, the narrator’s brother Sandy spent the summer on the Mawhinney farm in Kentucky as part of an Office of American Absorption program. The central family of that novel by this author is nearly relocated in the Homestead 42 program, which was designed by the Nazi-sympathetic regime. For ten points, name this American author who wrote of President Charles Lindbergh keeping the United States out of World War II in his novelThe Plot Against America.	ANSWER: Philip Roth
A member of this body named Waller Staples secured a report identifying two states as harboring “excessive exemptions”. A journal clerk in this body killed the chief clerk, while its member Henry Foote was attacked by a bowie knife. This body, whose members included former President John Tyler, passed the Partisan Ranger Act which allowed for units like Mosby’s Rangers to operate. A plan to train black troops  was  finally  authorized  by  this  body  in  1865,  which  was  also  the  year  it  made  Robert  E.  Lee commanding general of all armies. Located in Richmond, Virginia, for ten points, name this congress that debated Jefferson’s Davis’s war measures.	ANSWER: ConfederateStatesCongress
This  site  contained  an  elevator  powered  by  U-boat  motor,  which  its  owner  refused  to  use  after  it was  twice  struck  by  lightning  in  construction.  The  marriage  of  Hermann  Fegelein  to  Gretl  Braun  was concluded  at  this  site.  A  trail  from  Obersalzberg  leads  to  this  site  and  contains  the  steepest  road  in Germany. A popular myth holds that this site was a 50th birthday gift from Martin Bormann, but this site was used only 14 times due to a leader’s fear of heights. Situated above the Berghof, for ten points, identify Hitler’s headquarters in the Bavarian Alps.	ANSWER: Eagle’sNest(acceptEagle’seyrieandKehlsteinhaus; do not accept “Adlerhorst”) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 7
This event was in part a response to vetos of decrees passed by the Legislative Assembly and the demonstrations of the 20th of June. Pierre Vergniaud[ver-nyoh] protected the target of this event, who sought shelter with the National Assembly. Despite orders to withdraw during this event, the Swiss Guards were massacred after a standoff in a staircase and the arrival of forces from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. For  ten  points,  name  this  event  on  a  1792  summer  day  where  the  Paris  sections  stormed  the  Tuileries Palace and put an end to Bourbon rule.	ANSWER: Insurrection of August10th(acceptdeposingtheFrenchmonarchyordeposingLouis XVI, ordeposingtheFrenchBourbons, acceptstormingtheTuileriesuntil mention, accept verb equivalents)
A music video supporting this plan states that when it reaches Puttalam, Sri Lankans won’t have to worry about high power bills. A fund named for this plan is currently being used to construct the Karot Hydropower  Project.  In  his  2016  policy  address,  Cy  Leung  mentioned  this  initiative  by  name  over  40 times. A railway supporting this initiative connects London and Yiwu. Xi Jinping unveiled, for ten points, what massive Chinese infrastructure project that plans to rebuild an ancient trade route?	ANSWER:  The BeltandRoadInitiative  (acceptOneBelt,OneRoadinitiative;  accept  The  Silk Road EconomicBeltand21st century maritime SilkRoad; accept Sichou zhi lu jingjidaihe 21 shijili haishang sichuo zhilu; accept Yidaiyilu; prompt on partial answers)
In  a  novel  set  in  this  country,  the  main  character  and  his  companions  are  held  captive  in  a  pit  as one  of  their  comrades  is  boiled  alive  in  front  of  them.  Peter  Marlowe  is  held  captive  by  soldiers  from this country in a novel about a tradesman who raises rats for food in a prison camp. In one novel, John Blackthorne arrives in this country on board the shipErasmus; the character of Blackthorne was inspired by  William  Adams.King Ratdepicts  a  POW  camp  run  by  this  country’s  army  in  Singapore.  For  ten points, name this country, the setting of James Clavell’s novelShogun.	ANSWER: Japan
In a political cartoon, this legislation is shown constricting Uncle Sam in front of a group of senators, one of whom is holding a sword labeled “Peanut Dave.”Field v. Clarkupheld the legality of a portion of  this  legislation  that  allowed  the  President  to  “secure  reciprocal  trade.”  After  Thomas  Reed  defeated the sponsor of this law in the 1888 speakership election, Reed named him Chair of the Ways and Means Committee,  where  he  crafted  this  law.  The  Wilson-Gorman  Tariff  replaced,  for  ten  points,  what  tariff created by the so-called “Napoleon of Protection,” the future 25th President?	ANSWER: McKinleyTariff (acceptTariffAct of1890)
This kingdom subsumed the Mahan Confederacy and had its first capital at Wirye Castle. A king of this nation moved the capital to Sabi and attempted to revive the Gaya Confederacy as a buffer state. This kingdom won a fifth-century war against the Northern Wei dynasty. The Seven-Branched Sword was a gift given to Japan by this kingdom, which was legendarily founded by the sons of Jumong who, after fleeing  from  Goguryeo[goh-goo-ryuh],  settled  in  the  basin  of  the  Han  River.  For  ten  points,  name  this Korean kingdom that was conquered by Silla in 660 AD.	ANSWER: Baekje Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 7
As a result of a fever during an expedition in Honduras, this man obtained a bloodshot stare that inspired  his  nickname  of  “Old  Gimlet  Eye.”  “Who  makes  the  profits?”  and  “Who  pays  the  bills?”  are among the chapters of a book by this man that claims that industrialists are the real beneficiaries of mass human conflicts. This author ofWar is a Racketgave testimony before the House of Representatives in 1934  that  claimed  elites  were  planning  a  fascist  coup  to  overthrow  Franklin  Roosevelt.  For  ten  points, name this general who alleged he was chosen to lead the Business Plot.	ANSWER: Smedley Butler
This  ruler  dressed  as  a  Cossack  at  some  of  the  Metamorphoses  Balls.  Aleksey  Bestuzhev-Ryumin helped this ruler negotiate the Treaty of Abo, ceding southern Finland to Russia. This ruler ordered Ivan VI to be executed if he tried escaping which Catherine the Great carried out. During the Seven Year’s War, Pyotr Rumanytsev captured the fortress of Kolberg, but upon this woman’s death, Tsar Peter III failed to capture Berlin. The Imperial Academy of the Arts was supported by, for ten points, what Russian Empress who commissioned the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg?	ANSWER: ElizabethIof Russia
George Toolson, who he believed he was too good for the minor leagues, unsuccessfully used this law to sue Major League Baseball. William Radovich used this law to sue the NFL after he was blacklisted from  signing  in  the  Pacific  Coast  League.  This  law  was  used  to  uphold  the  reserve  clause  inFlood v. Kuhn, which ruled that baseball was interstate commerce and the MLB’s exemption from this law was an “anomaly.” The major American sports leagues are exempt from, for ten points, what 1890 law that was successfully used to prosecute Standard Oil and other monopolies?	ANSWER: ShermanAntitrust Act (or Law, etc.)
This politician’s brother Wellington became the attorney general of their home state. “Registration teas”  were  held  during  a  grassroots  campaign  for  this  politician,  who  derided  the  other  candidates  as “seven  mediocre  men.”  In  1917,  this  politician  noted  “I  want  to  stand  by  my  country”  before  making a  legislative  decision  that  was  criticized  as  “a  fit  of  female  hysteria,”  despite  55  other  men  also  voting against entering World War I. For ten points, name this Montana representative, the first woman to serve in Congress.	ANSWER: Jeanette Rankin
This  man  claims  that  the  allegorical  figures  “Brother  Fatted  Pig”  and  “Brother  Soft  Life”  reject visions in his workSermon Before the Princes. While being tortured to death, this man claimed that his motto was “omnia sunt communia,” roughly meaning “everything held in common.” This man was given a permanent position in St. Katherine’s Church while working in Zwickau, and he served as the spiritual leader of a force that was defeated by Philip of Hesse’s troops at Frankenhausen. For ten points, name this German preacher who was was executed in 1525 after leading rebels in the German Peasants’ War.	ANSWER: Thomas M ̈untzer Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 7
This ethnic group was divided into four realms upon the death of Dawaji. This group’s last ruler, Amursana,  was  the  target  of  a  unification  campaign  by  the  Qianlong[chee-ahn-long]  Emperor  that resulted in its genocide. This ethnic group, one of several descended from the Oirats, is the namesake of a  basin  between  the  Tian  Shan  and  Altai  Mountains,  and  their  namesake  “gate”  was  a  key  pass  along the Silk Road from China into Central Asia. Like the Uyghurs [whee-gurs], this ethnic group was based in  modern-day  Xinjiang[shin-jee-ahng].  The  Mongolian  for  “left  hand”  names,  for  ten  points,  what northwestern Chinese ethnic group?	ANSWER:Dzungars (acceptOiratbefore mentioned, prompt on Mongols)
Description acceptable. This event was thought to have occurred in retaliation for the bombing of the perpetrator’s Tunisian headquarters in Operation Wooden Leg. Muhammad Zaidan organized this event, which involved the redirection of a vessel to Tartus, Syria. A John Adams opera focusing on this event opens with two choruses of exiles and is named after its only casualty, the 69-year old Leon Klinghoffer. For  ten  points,  name  this  1985  event  in  which  members  of  the  Palestine  Liberation  Front  hijacked  an Italian passenger liner.	ANSWER: hijacking of the MSAchilleLauro(accept equivalents forhijacking, liketakeover; accept descriptions of aterroristattackontheAchilleLauro; prompt on descriptions of the death of (Leon) Klinghoffer before “Klinghoffer” is read)
At the start of this battle, Herwarth von Bittenfeld held a defensive position on the Bystrice River. The cutting of telegraph lines before this battle delayed the arrival of Frederick III’s 2nd Army. A month after this battle, the winners pushed for lenient surrender terms in the Peace of Prague and the North German  Confederation  was  formed  without  this  battle’s  loser,  which  formed  a  dual  monarchy  with Hungary a year later. For ten points, name this decisive victory for the elder Helmuth von Moltke during the Seven Weeks War in which the Prussians triumphed over Austria.	ANSWER: Battle of Koniggratz(or Battle ofSadowa)
A 1966 essay on this concept describes the “fearful obligation [...] to uphold the pillars of the temple with [a] frail white hand.”Peterson’s  Magazinechampioned this concept, as did a competitor published by Louis Godey.Ruth  Halland other writings of Fanny Fern illustrate the ideals of this concept, which Barbara Welter described in four virtues, including piety, purity, and submissiveness. For ten points, name this 19th century system of moral values that emphasized the woman’s sphere of influence in the home.	ANSWER: Culture ofDomesticity(orculture oftruewomanhoodbefore mentioned; accept word forms)
After this woman’s husband died, she went to live with Mollie Hay, with whom she may have become romantically  involved.  This  woman  invited  Eleanor  Roosevelt  to  the  Women’s  Centennial  Congress  she organized in 1940. This woman angrily noted how the “The murderous Sioux is given the right to franchise” while women were not. This woman, worked with Emma DeVoe to found the League of Women’s Voters, rose to the head of another organization after the retirement of Susan B. Anthony in 1900. For ten points, name this suffragette who headed NAWSA during the passage of the 19th amendment.	ANSWER: Carrie Chapman Catt Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 7
The schism addressed by this council was the subject of theHenotikon, which tried to reconcile the opposing sides. Dioscurus was exiled during this council, which was convoked by the Emperor Marcian. The  Oriental  Orthodox  branch  split  as  a  result  of  this  council,  which  issued  a  definition  that  refuted monophysitism and reaffirmed what Pope Leo I explained in a Tome he wrote prior to this council: that Christ had two natures. For ten points, name this 451 church council, held in Asia Minor.	ANSWER: Council of Chalcedon
Cardinal  Jaime  Sin  broadcasted  messages  during  this  event,  which  responded  to  rigged  “snap elections.”  Participants  in  this  event  wore  yellow  ribbons  to  honor  a  man  who  was  assassinated  at  an airport in 1983. Like revolutions against Joseph Estrada, this event took place on Epifanio de los Santos Avenue and brought Corazon Aquino to power. For ten points, name this 1986 revolution that overthrew Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines.	ANSWER:PeoplePowerRevolution(orEDSARevolutionbefore  “Epifanio  de  los  Santos”  is read; or PhilippineRevolutionof1986until “1986” is read; accept descriptions of theoverthrowof Ferdinand Marcosuntil his name is read)
This city’s Park River was buried after a 1936 flood, and it is home to the nation’s oldest publicly funded park, Bushnell Park. According to legend, Samuel Wyllys helped hide a document from Edmund Andros inside a tree here. This city, home to the armory of Samuel Colt and the Charter Oak, also hosted a  meeting  supported  by  the  Essex  Junto  that  discussed  New  England  secession.  Federalists  opposed  to the War of 1812 met in, for ten points, what city, the capital of Connecticut?	ANSWER:Hartford
After World War II, this agency ran a series of scrap centers, selling surplus bombers to Boy Scout troops and schools. Charles Dawes, Atlee Pomerene, and Eugene Meyer were among the many short-termed leaders of this agency, which, by the time it was closed in 1957, issued $2 billion in aid and loans. For ten points, name this government agency, founded in 1932 under President Hoover and expanded under Jesse Jones during the New Deal, which sought to rebuild the nation’s economic confidence by lending money to banks and businesses.	ANSWER: ReconstructionFinanceCorporation
After the Battle of Marathon, this man led the Antiochis troops that stayed behind to defend the battlefield,  and  served  asarchon  eponymousthe  year  after  Marathon.  This  man,  asstrategosunder Pausanias,  also  led  Athenian  hoplites  at  Plataea.  This  political  opponent  of  Themistocles  was  recalled early from exile after his 482 BC ostracism; according to legend, he voted for himself in that ostracism election by signing an illiterate man’s potshard. For ten points, name this popular Athenian statesman, nicknamed “the Just.”	ANSWER:Aristidesthe Just Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 7
In  this  state  on  Easter  Sunday  in  1873,  freedmen  defended  a  courthouse  against  Christopher Columbus Nash’s militia, who killed dozens and dumped many bodies into the Red River near Colfax. In this state, the 1868 Opelousas massacre was carried out by members of the Knights of the White Camelia, a group founded in this state by Alcibiades DeBlanc. John Monroe served as mayor of this state’s largest city  when  it  wasn’t  under  Civil  War-related  martial  law;  the  Emancipation  Proclamation  specifically exempted that city in this state, along with thirteen other parishes. For ten points, name this Southern state, site of the 1866 New Orleans riot.	ANSWER: Louisiana
A speech to Congress noted “We owe it [...] to candor and to amicable relations” to engage in this policy. The Russian ukase that asserted sovereignty over present-day Alaska led to the formulation of this policy, which was extended by the Clark Memorandum and Roosevelt Corollary. Secretary of State John Quincy Adams helped draft, for ten points, what 1823 statement of American foreign policy that warned European powers against interfering in the New World, promoted by the fifth U.S. President?	ANSWER: MonroeDoctrine
The perpetrator of this action was represented at his trial by Percy Forman after being captured in London while using the false identity of Ramon Sneyd. The Holy Week Uprising occurred after this event, whose subject was supporting a sanitation strike in Memphis. Robert Kennedy broke news of this event to a crowd in Indianapolis shortly after it occurred at the Lorraine Motel. James Earl Ray perpetrated, for ten points, what event in which the deliverer of the “I Have a Dream” speech died?	ANSWER:assassination(ormurder,killing, etc.) of Martin LutherKingJr.
Security guards around this party’s headquarters massacred 19 supporters of an opposing party in the Shell House massacre. This party staged a massive demonstration of civil disobedience in the Defiance Campaign. Magoo’s Bar and Church Street were locations targeted by this party’s militant wing, some of whose members were convicted in the Rivonia Trial. F.W. de Klerk lifted the ban on, for ten points, what party that has led post-apartheid South Africa?	ANSWER: AfricanNationalCongress(orANC)
This  system  was  weakened  by  Quia  Emptores.  Lehnsman  and  Edelfrei  operated  within  it.  Peter Kropotkin argued that this thesis of dialectical materialism had remained, even after the Duke d’Aiguillon got the National Assembly to outlaw it. The proliferation of retinues and enclosure helped end this system. Demesnes and fiefdoms were controlled via a nesting of fealty-swearers in, for ten points, what economic system of medieval Europe?	ANSWER: feudalism (ormanorialism)
TV shows from this country includeAutumn in My HeartandWinter Sonata. This country’s cultural exportation, dubbed the Hallyu, increased upon the release of a video featuring a man who sings on the toilet and pretends to ride a horse as the title “big brother.” A show set in this country features Hawkeye Pierce, played by Alan Alda, as he worked in a field hospital during a 1950’s war. For ten points, name this setting of the showM*A*S*Hand home country of PSY.	ANSWER: SouthKorea(orRepublicofKorea; prompt on Korea) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Backup Round 1
According to legend, a figure on a quadriga chariot atop this structure had its head turned towards the French Consulate when it was returned after the Napoleonic Wars. At this location, Leonard Bernstein conducted  a  rendition  of  Beethoven’s  Ninth  Symphony  with  the  word  “joy”  replaced  with  “freedom.” Ronald Reagan gave a speech in front of this location that demanded that, if Gorbachev sought peace, he should “come here to this gate”. For ten points, name this triumphal arch that formed part of the border between West and East Berlin.	ANSWER: BrandenburgGate (orBrandenburger Tor)
According  to Erhard Milch, this man shouted  that his employer  could kiss his rear when asked to unresign.  This  man  improved  upon  the  Olympiastadion  design  suggested  by  Werner  March.  He  rose  to his highest post following the death of Fritz Todt. He was known as the “Nazi who said Sorry” due to his confessed feelings of guilt at the Nuremberg trials. His book “Inside the Third Reich” details his role as Minister of Armaments and War Production. For ten points, name this architect who helped create a “Cathedral of Light” effect at the Nuremberg rallies.	ANSWER: Albert Speer
Investigations  into  this  institution  revealed  that  the  apparently  fictional  “Haven  Monahan”  wrote love letters plagiarized from Dawson’s Creek. An article about this institution had sections separated with crude lyrics from the song “Rugby Road.” That article about this institution begins with “Drew” talking to a teenager named “Jackie” at a party, at which “Jackie” was alleged to have been gang-raped. For ten points, name this university whose Phi Kappa Psi fraternity was the subject of the since-discredited 2014 Rolling Stonearticle “A Rape on Campus.”	ANSWER: UniversityofVirginia(orUVA;  acceptPhiKappaPsibefore  mentioned;  prompt  on Virginia alone before “University” is said)
Benoit Peeters wrote about “the world” of this author. This man wrote the seriesQuick  &  Flupke, and  his  work  was  influenced  by  his  friend  Zhang  Chongren.  Many  of  this  man’s  works  appeared  inLe Petit Vingti`eme. This man pioneered the “ligne claire” drawing style. This man’s most famous character made his debut “in the Land of the Soviets” with his dog Snowy. For ten points, name this Belgian author who created the characters Captain Haddock and Tintin.	ANSWER: Herg ́e(or Georges ProsperRemi)
A campaign pin that opposed this man said that this man wasn’t “even a good banana.” In a debate, this man claimed that “Democrat wars” in the 20th century killed as many people as the population of Detroit. In one election, this man ran with former professional football player Jack Kemp. After Nelson Rockefeller declined to run for the vice presidency, this man was chosen to replace him for the Election of 1976. For ten points, name this running mate of Gerald Ford and opponent of Bill Clinton in the election of 1996.	ANSWER: Robert “Bob” Dole Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Backup Round 1
Klemens von Galen spoke out against this program after a papal declaration opposing this program went partially ignored. Participants in this program later helped run Operation Reinhardt. Karl Brandt approved a petition for Gerhard Krechtsmar to be first victim of this program. Victims of this program were  held  at  places  like  Grafeneck  and  Hartheim,  where  this  program  developed  murder  by  gassing. Psychiatric hospitals were the primary site of, for ten points, what program that ordered “mercy killings” of the disabled in Nazi Germany?	ANSWER: Aktion T4(or theT4Program)
This bay was the operating ground of the tugboat Victoria J. Peed, which had been dispatched to combat  piracy  under  governor  William  Cameron.  The  skipjack  boat  was  designed  by  residents  of  this bay’s Tangier Island. This bay is home to the country’s first “all water” Historical Trail in honor of John Smith’s mapping efforts. This bay is separated from the Atlantic Ocean by the Delmarva Peninsula. The Susquehanna River feeds into, for ten points, what Maryland Bay known for its blue crab harvests?	ANSWER: ChesapeakeBay
A  recessed  canal  nicknamed  the  “Frying  Pan”  serves  as  an  optical  illusion  at  this  place,  where recurring squirrel motifs appear in interior spaces such as the Room of the Muses. This place’s owner was figuratively dethroned after a 1661 celebration at this place when he was arrested due to Jean-Baptiste Colbert’s influence. Louis Le Vaux and Andre le Notre’s design of this building so impressed Louis XIV that he later hired them to design another building. For ten points, name this French chateau constructed by Nicholas Fouquet, the inspiration for Versailles.	ANSWER: Chateau de Vaux-le-Vicomte
The name of this group was derived from a Virginia county. The name ‘Samuel’ was used by two of this  group’s  major  figures,  Abraham  Woodhull  and  Robert  Townsend.  Information  from  this  group  led Rochambeau to deter a surprise attack at Newport, Rhode Island. ‘John Bolton’ was the alias of Benjamin Tallmadge, an American major who assembled this group on the orders of George Washington. For ten points, identify this group that discovered the treason of Benedict Arnold, an early American espionage ring.	ANSWER: CulperRing
Philip Zelikow alleged that the U.S. government threatened to destroy works he wrote in opposition to these items. One document written by Alberto Gonzalez in this set claimed that the Geneva Convention could not be extended to stateless entities like the Taliban. John Yoo was once wanted for “crimes against humanity” for his role in drafting these documents. For ten points, what set of 2002 documents advised the CIA on the use of “enhanced interrogation techniques” on U.S.-held detainees?	ANSWER: TortureMemos Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 8
A lover of this man founded Enough is Enough, an organization opposed to online pornography. Tom Fiedler  wrote  a  scandalous  Miami  Herald  piece  about  this  politician  after  getting  a  tip  from  designer Donna Weems. This man managed George McGovern’s unsuccessful 1972 campaign and was targeted by Walter Mondale with the “Where’s the Beef?” ads. After a photo of this politician aboard theMonkey Businesssurfaced, this politician admitted to having an affair with Donna Rice. For ten points, name this “frontrunner” Colorado Senator whose 1988 Democratic presidential campaign fell apart.	ANSWER: Gary Warren Hart(accept Gary WarrenHartpence)
John  Lyng  came  to  power  after  a  series  of  mining  accidents  in  this  country  during  the  Kings  Bay Affair, where protests arose over the damming of the Alta River. In World War II, this country, where theAltmarkIncident  occurred,  named  a  debate  that  caused  the  collapse  of  the  Chamberlain  ministry. Reichskommissar Josef Terboven led this nation, where horsa gliders targeted a heavy water plant. This country’s  explorer  Roald  Amundsen  traversed  the  Northwest  Passage.  Vidkun  Quisling  is  known  as  a traitor in, for ten points, what country?	ANSWER: Kingdom of Norway
The first media accounts of this event were based on telegraphs from the steamerPlatte Valley, which was carrying survivors of this event. During this event one person was fastened to a tent with nails and lit on fire. General Grant claimed a report of this event left out “the part that shocks humanity to read.” Attackers  in  this  event  cried  “No  quarter!,  No  Quarter!”  while  shooting  soldiers  running  from  a  bluff after they surrendered. For ten points, name this 1864 massacre of African American Union soldiers that Nathan Bedford Forrest may have ordered.	ANSWER: Battle of FortPillow(orFortPillowMassacre)
In 1970, this singer noted that even though she didn’t “believe in communism,” she would post up to a quarter million dollars, if necessary, for bail for Angela Davis. This singer’s 100th charting R&B single was a 2014 cover of Adele’s “Rolling in the Deep.” In 1972, director Sydney Pollack shot film of this singer recording  a  live  album  in  Los  Angeles;  her  ensuing  album,Amazing Grace,  became  the  highest-selling gospel album of all time, but the film of the same name wasn’t released until 2018, three months after this singer’s death and funeral in Detroit. For ten points, name this singer of “Chain of Fools” and “Respect,” the legendary “Queen of Soul.”	ANSWER: Aretha Franklin
Coins  from  this  city  sparked  anger  after  the  reign  of  Vaballathus  was  emphasized  over  Roman emperors. This city reached its zenith after a 263 victory at the Battle of Ctesiphon, forcing Shapur I to cease his conquests. After the death of Odaenathus, this city declared itself an empire in the Crisis of the Third  Century.  Aurelian  took  this  city’s  queen  Zenobia  prisoner  and  destroyed  it  a  year  later.  For  ten points, identify this Semitic city in modern-day Syria, large parts of which were destroyed by ISIL in 2015.	ANSWER: Palmyra Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2018-2019Bowl Playoff Packet 8
Members of this religious sect built the Round Stone Barn and helped develop Babbitt metal. Hannah Cohoon,  a  member  of  this  sect,  created  many  drawings  of  trees  called  “gift  drawings.”  This  sect  made property  a  “consecrated  whole”  under  leader  Joseph  Meachem  and  Lucy  Wright.  This  group,  which underwent a revival in Watervliet named the Era of Manifestations, initially settled in New Lebanon, New York. Mother Ann Lee helped lead this religious sect, and another of its members, Elder Joseph Brackett wrote the songSimple Gifts. For ten points, name this American religious sect named for their ecstatic dancing during worship.	ANSWER: Shakers (acceptUnitedSocietyofBelieversinChrist’sSecondAppearing)
Along with Emanuel Celler, a person with this surname sponsored the 1946 act that allowed Indian and Filipino immigration to the U.S. In a 1941 editorial, a man with this surname argued that the U.S. should replace Britain as the world’s superpower in his article “The American Century.” A woman with this married surname became the first female Ambassador to Italy in 1953; her husband foundedSports IllustratedandFortune.  For  ten  points,  give  this  surname  of  socialite  Clare  Booth  andLifepublisher Henry.	ANSWER: Luce(accept HenryLuceor Clare BoothLuce)
After  this  man  helped  Francis  I  recapture  Marseilles,  he  defected  to  Charles  V,  who  ordered  the Algiers Expedition. Pope Paul III, the Strozzi family, and Giulio Cybo tried to kill this man, a “perpetual censor” who created the Alberghi clan system. Piyale Pasha and Turgut Reis defeated forces led by this man  at  the  Battle  of  Djerba.  Giovanni  Fieschi  led  a  conspiracy  against,  for  ten  points,  what  Genoese admiral who lost the 1538 Battle of Preveza, which allowed Ottoman control of the Mediterranean until the Battle of Lepanto?	ANSWER: Andrea Doria
This event names a legal test that requires that preemptive self-defense be “instant” with “no moment for deliberation.” In response to this event, “Pirate Bill” Johnston led a vigilante attack on theSir Robert Peel, prompting the intervention of Winfield Scott on the orders of Martin van Buren. Amos Durfee was killed  in  this  event  which  was  preceded  by  Navy  Island  being  declared  the  “Republic  of  Canada”  by William Lyon Mackenzie. For ten points, name this 1837 incident in which British soldiers burned a rebel ship and sent it over Niagara Falls.	ANSWER: CarolineAffair Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 8
This character, dressed in a pith helmet and safari clothing, interrogates Major Marchand at Fashoda in  one  cartoon  from  Punch.  In  another  cartoon,  this  character  impales  a  general  as  he  tries  to  make  a “jump” from ambition, power, and Calais to Dover as a satire of the Napoleonic Wars. This character, who was initially created by John Arbuthnot, asks “Who’s absent? Is it you?” in a recruiting poster for World War I; in that representation, he wears a waistcoat with the pattern of the Union Jack on it. For ten points, name this national caricature of England.	ANSWER: JohnBull
The  first  member  of  this  family  to  immigrate  to  the  Americas,  Humphrey,  was  killed  by  lightning while riding from Swansea to Boston. A member of this family invested in and appraised worthless stones in  the  Diamond  Hoax  of  1872.  ABlue Bookpublished  by  this  family  was  America’s  first  mail-order catalog.  Favrile  glass  was  developed  by  this  family,  which  ran  a  company  under  businessman  Charles Lewis and his son, designer Louis Comfort. For ten points, name this American family whose company designed ornate stained glass windows.	ANSWER: Tiffanyfamily  (accept  HumphreyTiffany;  accept  Charles  LewisTiffany;  accept  Louis ComfortTiffany)
The  Left  Hand  Spring  was  a  prominent  water  station  along  this  trail  named  for  a  fur  trader  of Cherokee descent. The extension of the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway caused the city of Newton to briefly be the endpoint of this trail, during which time the Gunfight at Hide Park took place. Joseph McCoy’s extension of this trail made Abilene a new endpoint instead of Wichita. The Arkansas River and the Red River of the South were crossed with difficulty along, for ten points, what trail used for cattle drives between Kansas and Texas?	ANSWER: ChisholmTrail
This  man  besieged  Antwerp  while  commanding  the  Army  of  the  North.  Alongside  Juan  Cagigal, this  man  was  imprisoned  for  participating  in  the  Capture  of  the  Bahamas  without  the  permission  of his  Spanish  superior.  This  captain  of  theLeanderwas  inspired  by  a  British  organization  to  found  a revolutionary Latin American secret society called Lautaro Lodge. This man toppled his country’s colonial administration in 1810, establishing the Supreme Junta of Caracas. For ten points, name this Venezuelan revolutionary who inspired future freedom fighters like Simo ́n Boli ́var and was nicknamed “El Precursor.”	ANSWER: Francisco de Miranda(accept Sebasti ́an Francisco deMiranday Rodr ́ıguez de Espinoza)
In  Boston,  this  person  campaigned  to  put  life-saving  equipment  on  Sable  Island,  which  saved  180 people  from  a  shipwreck  that  occurred  the  day  after  the  supplies  arrived.  Joseph  Dodd  introduced  a report by this person to the Senate, who helped found the Harrisburg State Hospital. An institution in Worcester[wor-ster]  was  built  after  this  woman  described  “stalls,  pens!”  where  people  were  “Chained, naked, beaten with rods.” Elizabeth Blackwell was passed over to serve as Superintendent of Army Nurses during the Civil War in favor of, for ten points, what activist who called for constructions of asylums for the mentally ill?	ANSWER: Dorothea Dix Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Playoff Packet 8
A minister of this man, Joachim Fredrich von Blumenthal, negotiated the Peace of Oliva and created a system to allow for the creation of a permanent standing army. With Charles X Gustav, this man beat John  II  Casimir  at  the  Battle  of  Warsaw.  This  Hohenzollern  leader  fought  Sweden  successfully  at  the Battle of Fehrbellin and during the “Great Sleigh Drive.” The Duchy of Cleves was opened by this ruler for “French Protestant comrades in Belief.” Huguenots were invited to this man’s land via the Edict of Potsdam.  The  Prussian  army’s  reputation  greatly  improved  under,  for  ten  points,  what  17th  century “Great Elector” of Brandenburg?	ANSWER: FrederickWilliamthe Great Elector of Brandenburg
This composer composed a suite for viola and strings on the death of King George V, and his requiem for  Franklin  Roosevelt  is  based  on  a  Walt  Whitman  elegy  for  Lincoln.  This  composer  ofTrauermusik andWhen  Liliacs  Last  In  The  Dooryard  Bloom’dincluded  the  “Turandot”  scherzo  in  hisSymphonic Metamorphoses  of  Themes  by  Carl  Maria  von  Weber, and Nazis censored his opera about the painter of the Isenheim Altarpiece. For ten points, name this German composer ofMathis der Maler.	ANSWER: Paul Hindemith
One politician in this family drew ire when he ordered his police superintendent, James Conlisk, to use lethal force against protesters rioting after MLK’s assassination. A woman who married into this political family was nicknamed “Sis.” The aforementioned man with this surname was accused of fabricating votes to hand the state of Illinois to Kennedy in the 1960 election, and his son was succeeded after six terms by Rahm Emanuel in 2011. For ten points, identify the surname of Richard J and Richard M, two mayors of Chicago.	ANSWER: Daleyfamily (accept Richard J and/or Eleanor and/or Richard MDaley)
In  2000,  this  group  partnered  with  a  Chinese  Triad  during  a  raid  on  a  resort,  and  planned  on exchanging  the  hostages  with  Ramzi  Yousef.  This  group  placed  TNT  inside  a  television  on  Superferry 14. This group, which was responsible for the Dos Palmas kidnappings in 2001, split off from the similar MNLF after being funded by Osama bin Laden. In 2016, this group abducted Indonesian sailors off the Sulu  Archipelago.  For  ten  points,  name  this  ISIS-allied  terrorist  group  that  operates  in  the  southern Philippines.	ANSWER: AbuSayyaf(orASG)
This ruler was restored by a military force known as the Hundred Thousand Sons of St. Louis, which put down Rafael del Riego’s uprising and ended the “Liberal Triennium” period. The Cortes of Cadiz was disbanded  by  this  ruler,  whose  tyrannic  last  ten  years  of  rule  were  nicknamed  the  “Ominous  Decade.” Supporters  of  this  ruler’s  brother,  Don  Carlos,  opposed  this  ruler’s  rejection  of  the  agnatic  succession clause of Salic Law when he designated Isabella II as his successor in 1833. For ten points, name this king of Spain, whose death led to a succession crisis that sparked the Carlist Wars.	ANSWER: FerdinandVII(orFernandoVII; prompt on Ferdinand)
Sara, a person with this surname, invented a recipe for baby formula while working with infants in Hell’s Kitchen and twice traced epidemics to Typhoid Mary. A woman with this surname was the only female speaker during the 1963 March on Washington and was the first African-American dancer to get a lead operatic roles in Europe. A man with this last name served as White House Chief of Staff under Ronald Reagan and as Secretary of State under George H.W. Bush. For ten points, identify this surname of performer Josephine and politician James.	ANSWER: Baker(accept Sara JosephineBaker; accept JosephineBaker; accept JamesBaker) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 8
Streetcars serve this city’s First Hill and South Lake Union neighborhoods, and its industrial districts are concentrated along the Duwamish River. A 1971 billboard asked the last person leaving this city to “turn out the lights” after the US canceled a program to develop supersonic planes. An observation tower was built for the 1962 World’s Fair here, and it is home to the Pike Place Market. Boeing was founded in, for ten points, what city on Puget Sound that is home to the Space Needle?	ANSWER: Seattle
This group was stopped from raiding the Hansa Stavanger after the intervention of American security advisor  James  Jones.  In  one  operation,  Somali  troops  lit  a  large  diversionary  fire  so  that  this  group could neutralize “Captain Martyr Mahmud.” After the Palestinian Popular Front hijacked a Boeing 737 to  negotiate  for  the  release  of  Red  Army  Faction  leaders,  this  group  successfully  liberated  Lufthansa Flight 181. This organization was formed after traditional police units failed to prevent the 1972 Munich massacre. For ten points, name this elite German counter-terrorism unit.	ANSWER: GSG9(orGrenzschutzgruppe9der Bundespolizei; acceptBorderProtectionGroup 9of the Federal Police and similar translations)
This man’s ideas were challenged by Nikolai Vavilov, who was then thrown in prison and died. This man  claimed  that  by  exposing  plants  to  high  moisture  and  low  temperatures,  he  could  convert  winter wheat to spring wheat, a process known as “vernalization” or “Jarovization.” This advocate of acquired characteristics  was  dismissed  from  the  Institute  of  Genetics  in  1965  after  criticisms  from  his  colleague Andrei Sakharov. For ten points, name this Stalin-supported pseudo-scientist, an anti-Mendelian thinker whose crackpot ideas on genetics influenced Soviet agricultural policy.	ANSWER: Trofim Lysenko
The  final  chapter  of  a  book  by  this  author,  “November  Elegy,”  profiles  a  descendant  of  many  of its  previous  subjects,  Paul  Garrett.  The  archaeological  hill  of  Makor  titles  a  novel  by  this  author  that discusses the history of Israel. A book by this man contains several stories narrated by the Commander and  includes  the  planning  of  an  operation  code-named  Alligator.  This  author  ofCentennialandThe Sourcewrote  a  book  that  inspired  a  musical  by  Rodgers  and  Hammerstein.  For  ten  points,  name  this author ofTales of the South Pacific.	ANSWER: James Michener
Scott Helvenston was one of four men killed in an ambush in this city; that killing of Blackwater contractors  prompted  Mark  Kemitt  to  promise  “we  will  pacify  [this  city].”  Haider  al-Abadi’s  forces recaptured this city in Operation Breaking Terrorism. A documentary subtitled “The Hidden Massacre” focuses on the claim that white phosphorus was used against civilians at the second battle of this city in 2004. It was the first city taken by ISIS during its 2014 invasion of Iraq. For ten points, name this city near Baghdad.	ANSWER: Battle of Fallujah(accept First Battle ofFallujah; accept Second Battle ofFallujah) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Playoff Packet 8
Members of this party allegedly received kickbacks from Swedish arms company Bofors AB. Shortly before a planned interview with Peter Ustinov, one leader of this party was assassinated in retaliation for ordering Operation Blue Star; that leader of this party suspended civil liberties during the Emergency. In a 2014 election, this party lost power to Narendra Modi’s BJP. For ten points, name this political party whose members have included Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi.	ANSWER: IndianNationalCongress(orINC)
James T. Brady and this man were part of the legal defense team that helped Daniel Sickles get an acquittal for the murder of Philip Barton Key II. This man entered his most famous position after the resignation of Simon Cameron over calls to arm slaves. Upon Lincoln’s death, this man either said that he belongs to the “ages” or “angels.” This politician’s dismissal was found in violation of the Tenure of Office Act. For ten points, name this Secretary of War during the 1860s whose dismissal by Andrew Johnson led to his impeachment.	ANSWER: Edwin Stanton
This event was investigated by Alden Smith, which found that it could be attributed to an “act of God.”  Benjamin  Guggenheim  died  in  this  event,  to  which  theMount Templereacted  immediately,  but theCalifornianignored the rockets and Morse code signals. Other fatalities of this event included John Jacob Astor, but not Molly Brown, who later called herself “unsinkable.” For ten points, name this April 1912 disaster in which a White Star liner on her maiden voyage struck an iceberg and sank.	ANSWER: the sinkingof the RMSTitanic
One portrait of this man depicts him alongside Jesus with the caption “I have chosen him.” This man kept the head of one enemy in his closet, and, on the suspicion that another of his enemies could transform into animals, he ordered all black dogs to be put to death. The Fort Dimanche [dee-mahnsh] massacre was carried out by this man, and Clement Barbot was put to death by this man’s Tonton Macoutes. For ten points, name this “President for Life” of Haiti, whose nickname referred to his background as a physician.	ANSWER: Fran ̧cois Duvalier(orPapaDocDuvalier)
The  KOSANBA  movement  at  UCSB  successfully  petitioned  the  Library  of  Congress  to  alter misspellings of this religion. The Kanzo process initiates new members to this religion, which holds that thegros[groh] and ti “bon anges”[bohnahnj] reside within humans. Veve symbols are used to represent this  religion’s  gods  during  rituals.  Mambos  and  Houngans  are  priests  of  this  religion,  which  honors  the supreme god Bondye. Papa Legba is a major loa of, for ten points, what Haitian religion that is commonly associated with sewing pins and dolls?	ANSWER: vodou(orvoodoo) Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Backup Round 2
A portrait of this man depicts him in a blue-green vest with gold buttons, sitting at a polished table with a needle and pair of burins. This artisan honored the “glorious ninety-two” in a bowl commemorating resistance to the Townshend Acts and commissioned by the Sons of Liberty. He was depicted with his left hand holding a not-yet-engraved teapot by portraitist John Singleton Copley. For ten points, name this Boston silversmith and patriot whose midnight ride was the subject of a Longfellow poem.	ANSWER: Paul Revere
Fowzi Nejad managed to survive this event when his executor realized he was on live TV. The sound of mice was used to justify the sound of bugging devices on the walls in this event that saw Red and Blue teams rappel through the roof. Trevor Lock tackled the perpetrator of this event, Oan Ali Mohammed. It began when the disgruntled Khuzestani DRFLA took 26 people hostage, and was ended by SAS troops. For ten points, name this 1980 hostage crisis in London that took place in a diplomatic building staffed by the government of Ayatollah Khomeini.	ANSWER: IranianEmbassysiege(prompt on partial answers)
In this year, an article was published accusing Lenin of being a German agent, prompting the massacre of Bolsheviks in the July Days. Order No. 1 was issued during this year, which hampered the disastrous Summer  Offensive  launched  by  Alexander  Kerensky  in  this  year.  One  event  in  this  year  involved  mass protests  on  Women’s  Day,  and  the  Provisional  Government  was  created  in  this  year  after  Grand  Duke Michael refused to take his brother’s throne. The February and November Revolutions occurred in, for ten points, what year, in which Tsar Nicholas II abdicated and the Bolsheviks established the Soviet Union?	ANSWER:1917
An  intermezzo  in  Robert  Schumann’sCarnavaldepicts  this  person.  He  composed  his  best  known work as a court musician for Napoleon’s sister Elisa, and later became one of Pauline Bonaparte’s many lovers. His acquisition of a viola by Stradivarius spurred him to commission Berlioz’sHarold in Italy, and a  melody  by  this  musician  was  the  basis  of  aRhapsodyby  Sergei  Rachmaninoff.  A  set  of  twenty-four caprices were written by, for ten points, what virtuosic Italian violinist?	ANSWER: Nicc ́olo Paganini
During one event held in one of these locations, a photograph was taken of one major world leader poking  another  leader  in  the  chest;  that  location  was  in  Sokolniki  Park  in  Moscow.  In  that  1959  event described  by  this  word,  one  participant  bragged  about  having  color  televisions  in  his  country.  A  group described by this word was scandalized by an affair in which members of this group snubbed the wife of its Secretary of War John Eaton. For ten points, name this word describing Andrew Jackson’s cabinet as well as a debate between Nikita Khrushchev and Richard Nixon.	ANSWER: kitchens (acceptKitchenDebate; acceptKitchenCabinet) Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2015-2016Bowl Backup Round 2
This man came to power after his brother was assassinated at Corfe Castle. This man lost control of the coastline after Byrhtnoth was defeated at the Battle of Maldon, and his son lost control of this man’s kingdom to Canute after the Battle of Assandun. This man’s territories were invaded by Sweyn Forkbeard after this man ordered the St. Brices Day Massacre in an attempt to stop paying the Danegeld tribute. For ten points, name this father of Edmund Ironside whose nickname incorrectly suggests that he was not well prepared.	ANSWER: Aethelredthe Unready (orAethelredII)
In one episode of this TV show, copies of Ruth Benedict’sThe Chrysanthemum and the Swordare handed out before a visit by Japanese executives. In another episode, Margaret, the daughter of Roger Sterling, has her wedding interrupted by John F. Kennedy’s assassination; that event also cements Betty’s decision to divorce her philandering husband. Lucky Strike is a major client of the protagonists of, for ten points, what AMC show about Don Draper, a 1960s advertising executive?	ANSWER: MadMen
The  archives  of  J.M.  Coetzee,  Kazuo  Ishiguro,  and  Gabriel  Garcia  Marquez  are  held  at  this university’s Harry Ransom Center. This university’s law school was sued inSweatt v. Painterfor rejecting an application based on race, and it successfully defended an admissions suit brought by Abigail Fisher. The first presidential library to be housed at a university, Lyndon Johnson’s, is found at, for ten points, what state flagship university in Austin?	ANSWER: University of Texasat Austin
A city in this country was given to the English king Charles II as dowry in 1661; that colony in this country was evacuated just 23 years later. A succession crisis began when the Portuguese king Sebastian I died in a battle in this country. An army from this modern-day country defeated a Southern neighbor at the Battle of Tondibi, and this country declared independence under a king of its Alaouite Dynasty, which succeeded the Saadi dynasty of King Ahmad al-Mansur. For ten points, name this country whose kings often ruled from the city of Marrakech.	ANSWER:Morocco
Late  in  life,  this  man  adopted  his  traveling  companion  and  memoir  co-author  Olive  Risley  as  his daughter. This man and his wife Frances sheltered freed slaves in their house in Auburn, New York. This man, who served two terms as Governor of New York with the backing of Thurlow Weed, negotiated a 7.2 million dollar land acquisition. For ten points, name this Secretary of State under Andrew Johnson whose namesake “Folly” resulted in America’s purchase of Alaska.	ANSWER: William Seward Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Backup Packet 1
The oldest continually operating venue of this type is thought to be in College Park, Maryland, where it was opened by the United States Army Signal Corps. One of these locations was built in an area then known  as  Orchard  Place,  where  Douglas  set  up  manufacturing  facilities  during  World  War  II.  In  1958, Pete Quesada suggested that Dwight Eisenhower should name a newly opened one of these facilities in Washington D.C. after his secretary of state. A naval flying ace named Butch O’Hare inspired the name of, for ten points, what type of transportation facility?	ANSWER: airports
The  hulls  of  two  massive  boats  built  for  this  man  were  excavated  from  the  bottom  of  Lake  Nemi but  destroyed  by  bombs  in  World  War  II.  Lawrence  Alma-Tadema  depicted  this  ruler’s  assassination, showing  his  uncle  cowering  behind  a  curtain.  This  figure  is  shown  as  a  boy  smiling  in  the  lap  of  his mother, who holds an urn carrying the ashes of this man’s father, Germanicus. For ten points, name this son of Agrippina, a Roman emperor who was killed by the Praetorian Guard in 41 AD and succeeded by Claudius.	ANSWER: Caligula(orGaiusJuliusCaesarAugustus Germanicus)
This  leader  gained  popularity  for  his  sharp  denunciation  of  the  23-F  coup.  Santiago  Carrillo  once nicknamed him “the Brief” for being a perceived remnant from an earlier era. This man appointed Adolfo Suarez as Prime Minister and worked to reduce the power of the Falange while in power. For ten points, name this king who abdicated in 2014, ending a nearly 40-year rule after he succeeded Francisco Franco in Spain.	ANSWER:JuanCarlosI
Description acceptable. Twenty-six people of this type were put to death after the San Felipe incident in  1596.  James  Hepburn  worked  primarily  with  this  specific  group  of  people,  whose  persecution  is  the subject  of  the  novelSilence.  These  people  were  often  forced  to  trample  on  images  known  asfumi-eto repudiate  their  faith.  Francis  Xavier  was  instrumental  in  first  reaching  this  group  of  people,  who  were primarily converted by the Portuguese. For ten points, name this persecuted class of individuals who were converted in towns like Nagasaki.	ANSWER: JapaneseChristians(prompt on partial answer)
This  man  advocated  for  the  creation  of  a  Continental  Charter  as  an  answer  to  England’s  Magna Carta. This man used the Bastille as a symbol of despotism in hisRights of Man, which caused a writ for his arrest to be published in England. This man criticized the “summer soldier” and “sunshine patriot” in a work that opens “These are the times that try men’s souls.” For ten points, name this author ofThe American CrisisandCommon Sense.	ANSWER: ThomasPaine Page 3  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2017-2018Bowl Backup Packet 1
This ruler allied with Mengli Girei of Crimea to counter Ahmed of the Golden Horde and Casimir II of Poland. He created a manorial system by which servants could be granted estates for loyal service known as thepomestie. This man’s marriage to the daughter of the last Byzantine Emperor lent credence to his claims of a Third Rome. This ruer annexed neighboring Novgorod and led the Great Stand on the Ugra River, ending the Mongol yoke over Russia. For ten points, name this Prince of Moscow, the father of Ivan the Terrible.	ANSWER: IvanIIIVasilyevich of Russia (orIvantheGreat; prompt on Ivan)
Two answers required. The border between these two states includes an exclave known as the Lost Peninsula.  John  Fulton  and  William  Harris  issued  competing  surveys  of  their  border,  centering  on  the mouth of the Maumee River. Shots were fired between these two states at the Battle of Philips Corners. In  the Frostbitten  Convention,  the northern  of these two rivals ceded its  border claims  in exchange for statehood and control of the Upper Peninsula. For ten points, what two Midwestern states fought a “war” over the Toledo Strip?	ANSWER: MichiganandOhio(prompt on partial answer)
A  character  created  by  this  author  has  the  Cyrillic  letter  Sha  carved  onto  the  back  of  his  hand by an enemy so that he can be recognized in the future. An industrialist uses barrels of toxin to kill a beautiful fish in this author’s story “The Hildebrand Rarity.” During World War II, this writer led the establishment of the 30 Assault Unit and the T-Force; he also oversaw British intelligence operations in Spain, which was nicknamed Operation Goldeneye. For ten points, name this author whose novelCasino Royaledebuted the character of James Bond.	ANSWER: Ian Fleming
This man stated that “some must be rich, some poor, some high and eminent in power and dignity; others mean and in subjection” while aboard theArabella. This man wrote a “Short Story” that chronicled the Antinomian Controversy. This man, who oversaw the expulsion trial of Anne Hutchinson, delivered the  sermon  “A  Model  of  Christian  Charity”  in  1630.  For  ten  points,  name  this  early  leader  of  the Massachusetts Bay Colony who described the colony as a “City Upon a Hill.”	ANSWER: John Winthrop
A leader of this city assisted Sicyon and used hellebore to poison wells during the siege of Kirrha. Another  leader  of  this  city  was  assassinated  by  Harmodious  and  Aristogeiton,  while  another  did  away withhektameroislave  labor.  Cleomenes[klee-oh-men-eez]  attacked  this  city  to  end  a  dynasty  that  was started by Peisistratus [piss-ih-stratus]. Cleisthenes[kl’ice-theh-neez] reformed the constitution of, for ten points, what ancient Greek city whose other political leaders included Solon, Draco, and Pericles?	ANSWER:Athens Page 1  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Backup Packet 1
Description  acceptable.  This  controversy  was  ended  by  a  treaty  negotiated  by  Earl  Aberdeen  and Richard  Pakenham.  William  Allen  coined  a  phrase  associated  with  this  controversy  that  referred  to  an agreement signed in St. Petersburg in 1824. This conflict partly resulted from the American establishment of Fort Astoria, which threatened Hudson’s Bay Company dominion over the Columbia River. The phrase “Fifty Four Forty or Fight” was used in, for ten points, what conflict revolving around ownership of the Pacific Northwest?	ANSWER: Oregonboundarydispute(acceptOregonQuestion;  accept  equivalents;  accept  any description  of  debates,  questions,  etc.  over  the  ownership  of  theOregonTerritory,  and/or  thePacific Northwestbefore mentioned)
Rhetoric riddled with “impious language” was part of the “extremely irregular and indecent” behavior that led to this man’s expulsion from a Forensic Club in Annapolis in 1762. This one-time member of the Sons of Liberty allegedly refused to allow a group to disband unless it indicted a particular printer in the New Castle case; that event, along with his questionable handling of the trial of John Fries, contributed to a set of hearings in 1804 accusing this man of Federalist bias in his judicial decisions. For ten points, name this only Supreme Court justice to have ever been impeached.	ANSWER: Samuel Chase(do not accept Salmon Chase)
Near the beginning of this battle, 75 prisoners of war were killed in the Bloody Gulch Massacre. A road that extended through a mountain valley at the site of this battle was named the “Bowling Alley.” The Great Naktung Offensive was part of this battle. While this battle was ongoing, a surprise amphibious assault  was  launched  on  Inchon.  For  ten  points,  name  this  early  battle  in  the  Korean  War  in  which U.N. forces defended a namesake 140-mile long defensive barrier, the high water mark of North Korean advancement.	ANSWER: Battle of the PusanPerimeter(prompt on Battle of Pusan)
A  pseudo-scientific  theory argued  that  the first  of  these constructs  began with  a  desire to  worship the sun; that theory was used to promote Turkish nationalism by Kemal Ataturk. James IV of Scotland marooned  two  babies  on  Inchkeith  Island  in  search  of  the  original  example  of  these  systems.  Another experiment about these systems led Akbar the Great to house several kids in a “dumb house,” attended by silent nurses. L.L. Zamenhof invented one of, for ten points, what means of communications, exemplified by Esperanto and Spanish?	ANSWER: languages (accept descriptions of “the firstlanguage”, even after Zamenhof is read; do not accept or prompt on alphabets)
A  representative  from  this  state  sued  John  McCormack  after  he  was  excluded  from  taking  his seat  in  the  House  because  of  corruption  allegations.  Adam  Clayton  Powell  and  the  first  black  female congresswoman, Shirley Chisholm, both represented this state. When this state’s longest serving senator, Daniel  Patrick  Moynihan,  announced  his  retirement  in  1998,  his  seat  was  won  by  a  former  first  lady. Hillary Clinton once represented, for ten points, what state whose current Senators are Kirsten Gillibrand and Chuck Schumer?	ANSWER: NewYork Page 2  NHBB Nationals Bowl 2016-2017Bowl Backup Packet 1